=== Chapter 3 — Design-Basis Event Characterization (R.P. Martin) ===
3.1 Regulatory Background and Expectation
    Safety analysis of a nuclear power plant under normal operation, transients
    and accidents supports its safety case as a form of design verification
    of the individual engineered safety features and the plant as a whole.
    Prior to performing such analysis, a set of event scenarios must be
    characterized in a manner that best demonstrates the plants adequacy
    with respect to design requirements. Generic methodologies related to
    the characterization of design-basis events (DBEs), which includes the
    identification of figures-of-merit and acceptance criteria, emerged through
    the development of commercial nuclear industry, as much by trial-
    and-error as it did by intent. Distinguishing between credible DBEs, the
    maximum hypothetical (or credible) accident and beyond design-basis
    accidents (BDBAs) became a regulatory priority following the U.S. Atomic
    Energy Agency (AEC)’s [1957] publication of WASH-740, “Theoretical
    Possibilities and Consequences of Major Accidents in Large Nuclear
    Power Plants”. Notably, the WASH-740 analysis was founded on several
    assumptions, some of which were criticized as unrealistic or otherwise
    considered incredible. Through the post-WASH-740 era, the AEC had
    identified general categories of DBEs; however, the basis for their selection
    relied primarily on expert judgment. During the rapid commercialization of
    nuclear power in the 1960s, the industry sought after more objectivity and
    formality, if only to reduce uncertainty through the licensing process.
    The practice of DBE identification stems from the universal regulatory
    requirement that applications for design approval must be accompanied by
    a safety assessment. Latitude is generally granted in regulations for the
    specific approach the designer or applicants may take for identifying and
    justifying the set of design-basis events, figures-of-merit and acceptance
    criteria. For the light-water reactor (LWR) industry that arose in the latter
    half of the 20th century, many guidance and standards documents published
    by regulators and other nuclear safety authorities make deviation from their
    conclusion difficult for new applicants.
    Of course, the characterization of DBEs is dependent on the design
    or, more appropriately, a set of deterministic principal design criteria.
    A milestone development in nuclear regulation occurred in 1967 when
    AEC published 10 CFR 50 Appendix A entitled, “General Design Criteria”
    (GDC) [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1999]. This set of principal

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 51

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           51


    design criteria reflected an intentional translation of the defense-in-depth
    philosophy, as described in Chapter 2, which emphasized engineered safety
    features for LWRs by the critical safety functions they supported: reactivity
    control, reactor coolant system (RCS) pressure and inventory control,
    RCS heat removal, containment environment and isolation, containment
    integrity, and radiation and radioactive effluent control. In International
    Atomic Energy Agency [2016], the International Atomic Energy Agency
    (IAEA) provides a similar list of “specific safety requirements” that
    adopts much of what appears in 10 CFR 50 Appendix A with additions,
    clarifications and bases reflecting experience gained from the construction
    and operation of current nuclear power plants.
    The defense-in-depth philosophy is also reflected in the GDC
    through requirements on the fission-product barriers that protect the
    environment from failures with radiological consequence. The front-line
    structures, systems and components important to preventing and mitigating
    radiological consequences consists of the fuel rods, control rod drive
    mechanisms, reactor pressure vessel, the containment structure, and all of
    the fluid and electrical systems needed to support reactor operation. The
    aim of these systems is to protect the core during accidents, providing long-
    term core cooling and preventing the release of radioactive materials to the
    environment, and they must be engineered to withstand the anticipated loads
    from dynamic effects associated with normal plant operation (including
    maintenance and testing), transients and accidents.
    Considering just the explicit figures-of-merit from the RCS and
    containment response safety analysis, the more pertinent GDCs include
    [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1999]:

    • GDC 10 — Reactor design
    • GDC 13 — Instrumentation and control
    • GDC 15 — Reactor coolant system design
    • GDC 16 — Containment design
    • GDC 17 — Electric power systems
    • GDC 19 — Control room
    • GDC 20 — Protection system functions
    • GDC 26 — Reactivity control system redundancy and capability
    • GDC 28 — Reactivity limits
    • GDC 29 — Protection against anticipated operational occurrences

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 52

    52                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    • GDC 34 — Residual heat removal
    • GDC 35 — Emergency core cooling
    • GDC 38 — Containment heat removal
    • GDC 41 — Containment atmosphere cleanup
    • GDC 44 — Cooling water
    • GDC 50 — Containment design basis

    The scenarios analyzed as DBEs are those resulting from the most
    limiting failures and plant state with respect to violating one or more GDCs.
    For the LWR industry the common set of DBEs has been established by
    a process that begun as engineering judgment but was later methodically
    formalized. This is reflected through the many revisions of the U.S. Nuclear
    Regulatory Commission’s (NRC) Standard Review Plan, beginning with
    the publication of NUREG-75/087 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,
    1975] in 1975, which was revised and reissued as NUREG-0800 in 1981,
    with multiple subsequent revisions since then [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2011]. Drawing from regulatory definitions of basic event
    categories, the GDC, and, in particular, single-failure redundancy, event
    identification has come to be characterized hierarchically by applying risk-
    based consideration, failure modes and effects analysis, and event tree
    sequencing. While this activity always accompanies a design certification
    application, it is seldom required for subsequent plant licensing support
    analyses that are customarily performed for fuel reloads.

    3.2 Consideration of the Single-Failure Criterion
    Regulations have evolved to recognize the value of a defense-in-depth
    strategy through multiple layers of physical, design and operational
    defenses. Safety measures are quantified in each of these domains when
    considered in the context of the principal design and other licensing criteria
    used in the evaluation and acceptance of plant designs. Among this broad
    set of requirements, the importance of the single-failure criterion cannot be
    overstated. This deterministic criterion specifies an approach to obtaining
    optimal redundancy of a system or of a group of components ensuring a
    high degree of reliability. It requires a systematic search of potential single
    failures followed by an evaluation of the effect of each single failure on the
    ability of the plant’s engineered safety features to satisfy specified GDCs.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 53

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           53


    On that point, the USNRC in [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007a]
    states:
    “[T]hat a system which is designed to carry out a defined safety function
    (e.g., an Emergency Core Cooling System) must be capable of carrying out
    its mission in spite of the failure of any single component within the system
    or in an associated system which supports its operation.”
    With no authoritative single-failure methodology, nuclear power plant
    designers and operators are responsible for demonstrating the completeness
    and consistency of their safety analysis by their own design control records.
    This is complicated by the variety of failure modes possible, their relative
    likelihoods, methods of detection, and whether the function of a given
    structure, system or component is active or passive, as addressed below.

    3.2.1 Failure types and detection
    The adoption of the single-failure redundancy in design means that
    resiliency to various vulnerabilities, including the complete failure of a
    structure, system or component important to safety, has been engineered
    into the design. The single-failure criterion is a generic requirement applied
    across all safety-related structures, systems and components in the nuclear
    power. Specifically, the design and evaluation of several safety functions
    require a single-failure assessment, including electrical power systems, a
    reactor protection system, residual heat removal, emergency core cooling,
    containment heat removal, containment atmosphere cleanup and cooling
    water systems.
    To address the requirement that engineered safety features be
    tolerant to failures without loss of safety, the definition of single-failure
    accepted by the NRC, IAEA and other nuclear safety authorities includes
    both single-point and common cause failures [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 1977; International Atomic Energy Agency, 1990; Institute
    of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2001]. Single-point failures are
    further described to address uncertainty related to practical identification
    methods. Specifically, these are DETECTABLE failures assumed to occur
    concurrent with all identifiable, but NON-DETECTABLE failures. Notably,
    potential failures that may occur without detection, such as by alarm,
    other tests or inspection, should be considered as undetectable and must

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 54

    54                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    therefore be assumed to exist at any time. The common cause failure is
    the failure of multiple components to perform their functions as the result
    of a single specific event or cause. The event or cause may reflect a design
    deficiency, a manufacturing deficiency, an operating or maintenance error, a
    natural phenomenon, a man-induced event, saturation of signals, a change
    in ambient conditions, or an unintended cascading effect from any other
    operation or failure within the plant.
    Operator errors are considered as potential single-failures. An operator
    error is considered as a potential single-failure for actions expected or
    directed by an emergency procedure, such as the failure to redirect
    emergency feedwater following a feedwater line break. Operator error is
    not considered a potential single-failure for actions that are not expected
    or directed by procedure, such as safety injection system (SIS) termination
    following a legitimate safety injection (SI) signal.

    3.2.2 Distinguishing active and passive failures
    The distinction between detectable and non-detectable failures also relates
    to the consideration of “active” failures, which are typically detectable
    versus “passive” failures, which are not. An active failure in a fluid system
    is either (1) the failure of a component that relies on mechanical movement
    for its operation to complete its intended function on demand or (2) an
    unintended movement of the component. Examples include the failure of
    motor- or air-operated value to move or to assume its correct position on
    demand, spurious opening or closing of a motor- or air-operated valve, or
    the failure of a pump to start or to stop on demand. Such failures can be
    induced by operator error [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1995].
    A passive failure in a fluid system is a breach in a fluid pressure
    boundary or a mechanical failure that adversely affects a flow path.
    Examples include a check valve failing to move on demand, fluid leakage
    from a seal at a pump or valve, or line blockage. In [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 1977], the NRC staff stated, “[I]n most instances…the
    probability of most types of passive failures in fluid systems is sufficiently
    small that they need not be assumed in addition to the initiating failure
    in the application of single-failure criterion.” For instance, motor-operated
    valves may be treated as passive components when the source of power to
    the operator is locked out.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 55

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           55


    Considerable discussion is given in [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 1977] regarding the treatment of check valves, noting
    that check valves have not been consistently classified as passive or
    active components. Conventionally, check valves are considered passive
    components, except for those in containment isolation systems; however,
    ANSI/ANS-58.9-1981 [American Nuclear Society, 1981] classifies “the
    failure of … a check valve to move to its correct position” as an active
    failure. Further, the IAEA states that some member states treat the failure
    of a check valve to open as an active failure, while others treat it as a passive
    failure [International Atomic Energy Agency, 1990].
    In applying the single-failure criterion to passive safety systems, the
    NRC [Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2001] redefined
    check valves as active components, stating that:

    “Safety-related check valves in the passive designs will operate under
    different conditions (low flow and pressure without pump discharge pressure
    to open valves) than current generation reactors and evolutionary designs.
    Check valves have high safety significance in the operation of the passive
    safety systems, and operating experience of check valves suggests that they
    may have a lower reliability than originally anticipated.”

    Yet, they provided for possible exceptions when a licensee can
    document:

    “ … a comprehensive evaluation of check valve test data or operational data
    for the similar check valve designs in similar applications and operating
    environments to demonstrate that the reliability of the particular check valve
    application is such that the probability of failure is comparable to those of
    passive components. A failure probability on the order of 1E-4 per year or
    less would be low enough to be considered as a passive failure.”

    For defense-in-depth reviews, the NRC does consider the effects of
    some passive failures (e.g., check valve failure, medium- or high-energy
    pipe failure, valve stem or bonnet failure) as potential accident initiators.
    But for licensing reviews, only on a long-term basis does the NRC consider
    passive failures in fluid systems as potential accident initiators in addition
    to initiating events. The NRC has stated there is “no reason to alter this
    regulatory practice for the passive ALWR designs, except for check valves.”

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 56

    56                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    3.2.3 Single-failure analysis methods
    A single-failure analysis methodology incorporates both qualitative and
    quantitative evaluation measures, yielding candidate limiting equipment
    failures and malfunctions for further characterization and, ultimately, to
    serve as the basis for a plant’s design-basis envelope. The assessment does
    not require consideration of any conceivable failure that could occur; rather,
    “only those systems or components judged to have a credible chance of
    failure are assumed to fail in applying the single-failure criterion” [Institute
    of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2001]. General guidance for use
    of the single-failure criterion appears in Table 3.1. The principal activities
    common in this guidance includes:

    • Identifying structures, systems and components that need to be reviewed;
    • Listing the credible vulnerabilities with respect to each critical safety
    function;
    • Defining figure(s)-of-merit and acceptance criteria that assure the critical
    safety function;
    • Evaluating the impact of failure for each vulnerability in terms of its
    influence on the figure(s)-of-merit and design and acceptance criteria.

    The guidance documents emphasize the principal design criteria
    objectives (e.g., GDCs) with much of the original basis for both the NRC’s
    and IAEA’s positions attributed to the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
    Engineers (IEEE). Consequently, the role of the single-failure criterion
    in the methodology for DBE identification and characterization is less
    developed and plant vendors and licensees have often developed unique
    methods based on the interpretation of the documents appearing in Table 3.1,
    such as [Mineck, 1989; Root and Torres, 1995].

    3.3 Categorization of DBEs, Figures-of-Merit
    and Acceptance Criteria
    DBE analysis demonstrates the extent of design robustness that defines the
    design-basis envelope. The details of the DBE involve the identification of
    vulnerabilities in engineered safety features based on possible deviations
    in the phenomenological state they control. In assessing potential system
    failures, any deviation from the nominal system state would present a design

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .    9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 57

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                            57

    Table 3.1. Single-failure guidance documents (derived from [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2005a]).

    Document                                                       Content

    SECY-77-439, “Single-Failure           A USNRC staff reports to the commission
    Criterion”                             summarizing the status and use of the
    single-failure criterion as a tool in the reactor
    safety review process.
    “IEEE Criteria for Nuclear Power       Requires the plant’s protection systems to satisfy
    Plant Protection Systems,” IEEE        single-failure criterion (SFC).
    Std. 279-1971
    “IEEE Standard Application of the      This version broadens the application of the
    Single- Failure Criterion to           single-failure criterion from “protection
    Nuclear Power Generating               systems” to “safety systems”.
    Station Safety Systems,” IEEE
    Std. 379-2000
    “IEEE Standard Criteria for Safety     The 603 standard defines the “single-failure
    Systems for Nuclear Power              criterion” and discusses its implementation for
    Generating Stations,” IEEE Std.        single-failure analysis of “safety systems”. This
    603-1991                               standard refers to the 379 standard for details of
    implementing SFC. The NRC has not modified
    RG 1.153 to reflect the updated 603
    standard.
    “USNRC Standard Review Plan,”          Chapter 15 presents review criteria for analyzing
    NUREG-0800                             transients and accidents, including the SFC.
    Regulatory Guide 1.70 — Standard       Chapter 15 describes DBAs with guidance on
    Format and Content of Safety           SFC assumptions.
    Analysis Reports for NPPs
    “Regulatory Guide 1.153 —              Endorses IEEE Std 603-1991 as acceptable for
    Criteria for Safety Systems”           the power-, control- and instrumentation-
    portions of safety systems.
    Regulatory Guide 1.53 —                Endorses IEEE Std 379-2000 as an acceptable
    “Application of the                    method for satisfying the single-failure
    Single-Failure Criterion to Safety     criterion for “safety systems”.
    Systems”
    “Single-Failure Criteria for Light     The NRC has not endorsed the SFC for fluid
    Water Reactor Safety-Related           systems. Not endorsed by NRC. May be in use
    Fluid Systems,” ANSI/ANS 58.9          from early licensing activities.
    IAEA Safety Series No. 50-P-1,         The IAEA’s statement on the single-failure
    “Application of the                    criterion. This report is no longer endorsed by
    Single-Failure Criterion”              the IAEA.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 58

    58                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    challenge. Considering the high degree of uncertainty often associated with
    event progression, the characterization of DBEs can be speculative without
    well-defined event categories and objectives.
    In large systems like a nuclear power plant, the failure of an engineered
    safety feature may be caused by one or more component faults. One option
    for event identification is to consider all permutations of possible faults,
    as is done in the preparation of fault trees [Lee and McCormick, 2011].
    In this approach, a comprehensive study of fault conditions is performed
    where event categories are derived from patterns leading to the predominant
    plant damage end states. Since the space of potential candidates grows
    combinatorially with the number of faults, this is very often an impractical
    approach when dealing with complex systems such as nuclear power plants.
    The common method supporting the identification of DBEs, appearing
    in [International Atomic Energy Agency, 2002] and described further below
    and in Section 3.4, manage the complexity of a nuclear power plant by
    recognizing the DBE as a succession of objectives and consequences. The
    objectives are statements reflecting safety goals. Of course, the ultimate
    safety goal of any nuclear power plant is the protection of the public
    from uncontrolled release of fission products. Practical safety goals for
    characterizing DBEs are expressed hierarchically based on risk and proceed
    through an evaluation of credible failure modes applied first to the plant
    itself, then to the engineered safety features that protect one or more of the
    plant’s critical safety functions.
    Subsequently, the failure modes considered in characterizing candidate
    DBEs are derived with respect to a set principal design criteria (e.g.,
    the GDCs for LWRs) that address both plant- and safety-system-level
    design requirements. Design requirements are translated into reliability and
    vulnerability assumptions, i.e., qualitative statements identifying structures,
    systems and components segregating circumstances with a very low
    likelihood of failure from those that are more credible. This may include
    automated or manual actions.
    The effects or consequences of failures are expressed in terms of
    performance figures-of-merit against acceptance criteria related to the
    plant’s safety functions that serve as surrogates to radiological release.
    Suites of events with common initiating events and impacted safety

December 17, 2018   18:5    Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 59

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                          59


    functions can often be grouped as a DBE category. This event-based
    approach is possible because disparate faults will very often result in similar
    system response characteristics that effectively describe a particular event
    category. While this is arguably an inductive approach, assessment based
    on safety goals and accident consequences avoids issues concerning the
    propagation of faults with very small probabilities of occurrence that make
    a fault tree approach impractical.

    3.3.1 High-tier categorization
    DBEs address those scenarios resulting from credible failures expected to
    occur over the lifetime of a plant, plus a few exceptional scenarios that
    are not expected to occur over the plant’s lifetime, but are examined to
    demonstrate design robustness. The regulatory intent for the set of DBEs
    analyzed is that they represent a sufficiently broad number of situations
    to demonstrate a thorough assessment of credible risk-significant events.
    An objective selection methodology begins with the categorization of
    transients and accidents. Two general event classifications recognized by
    national nuclear safety authorities are distinguished based on frequency
    [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1978; U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2005b]:

    (1) Anticipated operational occurrences (AOOs) — Events expected to
    occur on a frequency of one or more times during the lifetime of the
    plant;
    (2) Postulated accidents (PAs) — Events not expected to occur that are
    evaluated to demonstrate design adequacy.

    Categorization of initiating events by either AOOs or PAs provides
    a foundational characteristic between events that serves to distinguish
    the more credible DBEs from severe accidents. The American Nuclear
    Society (ANS) [1973] published a standard (ANS 18.2 1973) entitled,
    “Nuclear Safety Criteria for the Design of Stationary Pressurized Water
    Reactor Plants”.a For safety analysts, this Standard organized DBEs by

    a A BWR version was published in 1979.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 60

    60                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    their “condition”. This “condition” primarily refers to event frequency and
    the classifications defined in that Standard are:

    • CONDITION I: Events expected to occur frequently in the course of
    power operation, refueling, maintenance or plant maneuvering.
    • CONDITION II: Events expected to occur on a frequency of once per
    year during plant operation.
    • CONDITION III: Events expected to occur once in the lifetime of the
    plant.
    • CONDITION IV: Events not expected to occur that are evaluated to
    demonstrate the adequacy of the design.

    Condition I events broadly captured all normal operational transitions
    within specified operational limits. Conditions II through IV events
    constitute the DBE licensing analyses. Condition II events are AOOs.
    The Standard expanded the definition of AOO to mean deviations from
    normal operation that are mitigated through appropriate design provisions,
    meaning no significant damage occurs to fuel or other structures, systems
    or components important to safety. Condition III and IV events are
    PAs. The consequences of these events include the possibility of fuel
    damage; however, any damage resulting in the release of radioactive
    material is kept within regulatory siting limits (e.g., 10 CFR 100 in
    the U.S.). These events, combined with conservative assumptions for
    radiological releases, ultimately determine the land area requirement for
    the plant site (see Chapter 12). Beyond design-basis accidents (BDBAs)
    are identified as Condition V per ANS 18.2 1973. They encompass the
    set of hypothetical core damage events of very low frequency but with high
    radiological consequence, exceeding site. High radiological consequence in
    this context is expected to result from the failure of multiple fission product
    barriers.

    3.3.2 Safety measures related to critical safety functions
    Population of safety-significant events into the Condition II–V categories
    are distinguished based on the impact of the event with respect to the critical
    safety functions described in Chapter 2. While DBEs are analyzed with
    respect to radiological consequences, the characterization of DBEs seeks

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 61

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           61


    only to identify which critical safety functions are threatened by the event.
    This is revealed through analysis, measured by the calculation of various
    figures-of-merit and compared to acceptance criteria that serve as surrogates
    to radiological release.
    Since the safety objective is the preservation of fission product barriers,
    the figures-of-merit relate to the various loads that could lead to a failure
    (e.g., heat flux, temperature, strain and reactivity for fuel, and the pressure
    and temperature for the RCS and containment). Each critical safety function
    will affect one or more figures-of-merit. Generally, a deterministic safety
    philosophy is applied regarding the protection of critical safety features. For
    example, regarding RCS pressure control, the design criterion in the United
    States [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007a] limits pressure to
    less than 110% of the design value. Failure in a majority of the critical
    safety functions is considered sufficiently independent that they effectively
    define a unique DBE category, such as reactivity control, which is discussed
    in Chapter 10. Similarly, while challenges to containment-related safety
    functions are related to LOCA events, assessment of containment safety
    functions, discussed in Chapter 11, is performed independent of RCS/core
    safety functions.
    Consistent with risk-informed practices, the distinguishing charac-
    teristic among the event frequency categories of ANS 18.2 1973 relates
    to recognizing a graded acceptance criteria based on consequences. This
    graded approach is exclusive to the RCS-related safety functions and
    its consequences of failure (i.e., fuel failure and radiological release).
    Specifically, for the more likely RCS faults, acceptance criteria are
    more stringent and, conversely, for less likely events, acceptance criteria
    are less stringent. Since safety standards and siting criteria are based
    on the consequences of the less likely events (i.e., CONDITION IV),
    this approach inherently results in large safety margins for the likely
    events anticipated during the lifetime of the plant. Associated acceptance
    criteria corresponding to the RCS/core heat removal safety functions for
    Condition II, III and IV events are:

    Condition II Events (AOOs):

    • Fuel cladding integrity is maintained by ensuring that specified acceptable
    fuel design limits are not exceeded.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 62

    62                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    • Radiological consequences are less than the limits expressed in 10 CFR
    20, Standards for Protection against Radiation.

    Condition III Events (PAs):

    • A small fraction of fuel failures may occur (based on an exceedance of the
    specified acceptable fuel design limits), but these failures do not hinder
    core coolability.
    • Radiological consequences are a small fraction of the 10 CFR 100 limits
    (generally less than 10%).

    Condition IV Events (PAs):

    • After any calculated successful initial operation of the ECCS, the
    calculated core temperature is maintained at an acceptably low value
    and decay heat is removed for the extended period of time required by
    the long-lived radioactivity.
    • The total potential consequences at the nearest exclusion area boundary
    and at the low population zone outer boundary are well within the
    guidelines of 10 CFR Part 100.

    3.4 DBE Scenario Definition
    Having established context for identifying DBEs through design
    requirements and acceptance criteria, the credible failures modes are
    assessed and organized to distinguish unique DBE scenario categories
    and events. Rather than pursuing a generic reliability analysis involving
    an exhaustive evaluation of potential faults, the identification of system-
    level failures in an event-based approach is risk-informed while other DBE
    attributes are defined deterministically, often based on the limiting condition
    of operation and technical specifications targets. The severity of the event
    is then compounded by the requirement that the challenged critical safety
    function, as served by one or more engineered safety features, is degraded
    by a “worst single failure”. This event-based process, as illustrated in
    Figure 3.1, eliminates multiple failures scenarios from consideration and
    thus provides a more workable solution than the one reliant on a more
    data-demanding PRA.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 63

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           63

    Fig. 3.1. DBE scenario definition considerations.


    A variety of reliability analysis methods and tools are available for
    a system safety assessment. These include functional hazard assessment,
    failure modes and effects analysis, hazard and operability study, event
    and fault tree analysis, and master logic or dependence diagrams, Markov
    analysis, and common cause analysis [Lee and McCormick, 2011], as well
    as the more recent dynamic probabilistic risk/safety assessment methods
    [Aldemir, 2013]. Regardless of the preferred method, the objective of
    the reliability analysis is to systematically assess postulated failures and
    determine the plant’s response. A successful reliability analysis requires the
    analyst to include all risk-significant failure modes for each contributing
    element in the plant. A DBE derives its detail by pursing the reliability
    analysis progressively through these scale levels: plant, system, subsystem,
    assembly, subassembly or part level.
    When the application of these methods and tools are integrated with
    the design process, this assessment inherently incorporates safety in design
    from feedback received from the concurrent system safety assessment. The
    process is iterative as safety insights are revealed, design requirements
    defined, concepts redesigned and reassessed. When this approach has been
    followed and is well documented, the subsequent DBE scenario definition
    task will benefit from the compilation of failure data and risk insights that
    result from that process.
    Given that system safety assessment practices have been developed
    primarily for assessing the frequencies and consequence of failures, rather
    than to characterize design resiliency, the scope of these analysis methods
    and tools is beyond what is necessary for DBE scenario definition.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 64

    64                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Nonetheless, there are elements and insights from this field of reliability
    engineering that are directly applicable to the DBE scenario definition
    objective.

    3.4.1 System-level failure modes
    System-level failure modes are failures reflecting operability deviations
    challenging system-level structures, systems or components that are relied
    upon to remain functional during and following design-basis events. Failure
    is first characterized considering measurable plant-state deviations. For a
    nuclear power plant, the measurable states are those available to a plant
    operator and are implemented to support plant monitoring and control of the
    reactor protection system and the actuation of engineered safety features.
    Table 3.2 presents a sample list (see also [International Atomic Energy
    Agency, 2003]).
    Table 3.2. Monitored plant state variables.

    Process parameter                Failure events

    Neutron flux/Power        Shutdown/Low/High/Erratic
    Control rods              Withdrawn/Fully Inserted
    Flow                      None/Low/High/Erratic
    Liquid level              Low/High
    Temperature               Low/High/Erratic
    Pressure                  Low/High/Erratic
    Coolant Ph                Low/High
    Valve position            Open/Closed/Partial
    Pump operation            On/Off/Locked
    Heater operation          On/Off


    A cursory system-level reliability analysis is possible considering
    precedence from LWR applications, which has been captured by several
    regulatory bodies. In the United States, that document is NUREG-0800,
    Standard Review Plan [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007a].
    In NUREG-0800, several event categories have been identified. From a
    cursory mapping of these categories to a generic nuclear power system, one
    candidate event list is:

    • Increase in Heat Removal by a Cooling System
    • Decrease in Heat Removal by a Cooling System

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 65

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           65


    • Decrease in Coolant System Flow
    • Increase in Coolant System Flow

    These events could apply across multiple plant coolant systems, including
    the core, primary coolant, containment or auxiliary coolant systems.

    3.4.2 Limiting plant state
    With respect to event characterization, regulations extend the concept of
    the single-failure criterion to assure that analyses deterministically treat the
    initial plant state. A prime example of this strategy involves the impact of
    crediting onsite power available with offsite power unavailable and vice-
    versa. While it may seem counter intuitive to expect scenarios with a loss-
    of-offsite power to be less challenging than the alternative, one example is a
    narrow range of small break loss-of-coolant accidents (LOCAs) that under
    sustained pump operation exhibit greater coolant loss and thus higher peak
    clad temperatures. Another example of a limiting initial condition, involves
    the common regulatory requirement that LOCA evaluations include an
    assessment of the most serious concurrent single failure in the ECCS
    subsystem, such as a loss of low head safety injection. With these single-
    failure considerations in the design and analysis domains, the nuclear power
    plant has effectively mitigated many “failure-to-function” issues as they
    apply to safety features in the evaluation of DBEs. While not eliminated,
    many of these features are assumed to be operating with reduced (yet
    adequate) performance because application of the single-failure criterion in
    the analysis results in a partial loss-of-function in the as-designed system.
    In some situations, non-safety systems may be considered to comply
    with the single-failure criterion. For example, non-safety-related systems
    may be assumed operable to mitigate transient or accident conditions in
    specified situations. Regulatory Guide (RG) 1.206 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2007b] states at Section C.I.15.6.2:
    “[Safety] analyses may assume that non safety-related systems or
    components are operable for the following cases:

    (1) When a detectable and non-consequential random and independent
    failure must occur in order to disable the system.
    (2) When non safety-related components are used as backup protection.”

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 66

    66                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    The main feedwater control system is an example of Case (1).
    Continued operation of the main feedwater control system (MFCS) may
    be assumed in those DBEs not related to feedwater malfunction, loss of
    AC power or turbine trip, if it can be shown that a failure in the MFCS is
    not a consequence of the initiating events, and the probability of a random,
    independent failure occurring in the MFCS within the time of the initiating
    event is extremely low.
    Relative to Case (2), turbine stop and control valves may be credited
    in the design-basis analyses for backup protection if the valves are
    demonstrated to be reliable and subjected to surveillance requirements in
    the technical specifications. The requirement for establishing a surveillance
    requirement (SR) and limiting condition for operation (LCO) for backup non
    safety-related components credited in safety analyses is stated in 10 CFR
    50.36(c)(2)(ii)(C).
    The NRC accepted crediting the main steam isolation valve’s (MSIV)
    back up valves in the analysis of steamline break (SLB), for the
    Westinghouse AP1000 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2004]. The
    staff noted that “operating data show that the turbine stop and control valves
    are reliable” and that surveillance requirements and limiting conditions for
    operation were included in the technical specifications to “ensure reliability
    of … MSIV backup valves and main steam branch isolation valves”. This
    is consistent with the 1976 staff endorsement of the reliance of non safety-
    related components in steam and feedwater systems to isolate flow during
    steamline break accidents [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1976].
    In a deterministic safety analysis, the most limiting initial conditions
    that are expected over the lifetime of the plant should be used and these
    are usually based on sensitivity analyses. A selection of common limiting
    plant state assumptions associated with a LOCA are presented below. The
    term “unfavorable” implies resulting in the smallest margin to acceptance
    criteria:

    • Loss-of-offsite power;
    • Most unfavorable single failure;
    • For breaks or blockages, most unfavorable location;
    • For breaks or blockages, most unfavorable break or blockage size;

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 67

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           67


    • A reactivity control rod or drum is assumed to have seized. If there is any
    variability in the relative reactivity worth, then the seized control rod or
    drum is the one that has the greatest effect on reactivity.


    3.4.3 Initial conditions
    The analytical characterization of a nuclear power plant’s state prior to a
    transient or accident is its initial condition. These parameters are either
    set to nominal or at a conservative bound. In the preparation of a safety
    analysis, those parameters to be conservatively bounded are set based
    on the defined limits of operation, many of which will be set consistent
    with the plant’s Technical Specifications. The Technical Specifications
    and an accompanying basis document provide parameter limits or ranges,
    reasoning, method or calculation supporting a particular licensing limit,
    i.e., the technical specification. The technical specification is quantified
    from a combination of its nominal operational tolerances, measurement
    inaccuracies and calculation uncertainties.
    To what extent a particular design basis safety analysis supports a
    plant’s licensing basis can vary from plant to plant. There is no regulatory
    requirement to support every technical specification or limiting condition
    of operation in every analysis, nor may it even be possible. Parameters that
    have either negligible or inconclusive influence on acceptance criteria may
    be set with nominal values. The full set of parameters to be bounded is
    determined based on their relative importance to analysis figures-of-merit
    for response. The assessment of importance commonly prepared in a formal
    process conventionally referred to as the Phenomena Identification and
    Ranking Table (PIRT). This is described in more detail in Chapter 4.
    Table 3.3, reproduced from [International Atomic Energy Agency, 2003],
    highlights a typical set of initial conditions with respect to the figures-
    of-merit for core cooling and system pressure. The conservative selection
    of containment model parameters, leading to an overestimation of the
    maximum containment pressure, is also shown. Containment analysis is
    discussed in detail in Chapter 11. Bounding treatment of radionuclide
    transport for calculating design-basis doses is also typical. This is presented
    in Chapter 12.

December 17, 2018    18:5    Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .        9in x 6in   FA     b3381-ch03    page 68

    68                        DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Table 3.3. Typical initial conditions for the Plant Accident Analysis (reproduced from
    [International Atomic Energy Agency, 2003]).

    Conservative direction

    Parameter                                          Core cooling                  System pressure

    Reactor power                                         Max.                           Max.
    Reactor residual heat                                 Max.                           Max.
    Reactor coolant flow                                   Min.                           Min.
    Reactor core bypass                                   Max.                            Min.
    Reactor coolant temperature                           Max.                            Min.
    Reactor coolant pressure                              Min.a                          Max.
    Steam generator level                                  Min.                           Min.
    Steam pressure                                        Max.                           Max.
    Feedwater flow                                    N/A (consistent                N/A (consistent
    with power)                    with power)
    Pressurizer level                                      Min.                          Max.
    Power peaking factor                                  Max.                           Max.
    CR worth available for reactor                         Min.                           Min.
    scram
    Parameter                                              Containment pressure/Temperature
    Containment initial pressure                                           Max.
    Containment initial temperature                                        Min.
    Spray water temperature (if                                            Max.
    applicable)
    Containment leak rate                                                  Min.

    a For LOCA analysis, a maximum value should be selected. For ATWS and severe accident analysis,
    best-estimate plant initial conditions are typically acceptable, even for design and licensing type
    analyses

    The results of analyses depend strongly on the core and fuel modeling,
    which determine the reactor power behavior during the course of accidents.
    Neutronics parameters do not explicitly appear in a PIRT; nonetheless,
    they do influence fission power, stored energy and decay heat. When
    scram is credited, fission power is not considered a significant parameter.
    Within a few seconds, fission power is predominantly the result of delayed
    neutrons. Stored energy (early) and decay heat (late) are considered
    important phenomena impacting fuel rod heat removal. Both phenomena
    are predominantly influenced by core power and power distribution.

December 17, 2018    18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA    b3381-ch03   page 69

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                              69


    Since core and fuel design has a strong bearing on safety, analyses
    explicitly model the dominant phenomena impacting a core loaded with
    a specific fuel product. Event scenarios are evaluated at various times
    in the operating life of the fuel product. In general, nuclear power plant
    safety analyses intrinsically model core/fuel behavior both using time-in-
    life (or cycle) initial conditions and propagate the unique core/fuel condition
    through the conditions specific to a given design-basis event.
    In confirming a conservative estimation of reactor power, analysts
    should consider that reactivity feedback depends on the direction of
    the change (increase or decrease) of the parameters under consideration. The
    direction may change during the course of the accident and therefore the
    influence of these model parameters may also vary during the process.
    The form of the sensitivity calculation matrix of initial conditions impacting
    a fuel model is illustrated in Table 3.4. A few initial conditions, such
    as reactor power and decay heat, may be set based on well-understood
    and documented precedence. Others will require explicit calculations. The
    selected parameters need to be assessed for their influence through each
    event category to finalize analysis guidance.

    Table 3.4. An example of core/fuel model parameter sensitivity matrix.

    Fraction         Fuel        Moderator        Moderator
    of delayed    temperature    temperature        density
    Event category               neutrons      coefficient    coefficient      coefficient   …

    Increase in heat removal     Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    by secondary system
    Decrease in heat removal     Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    by secondary system
    Decrease in reactor          Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    coolant flow rate
    Reactivity and power         Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    distribution anomalies
    Increase in reactor          Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    coolant inventory
    Decreases in reactor         Max/Min       Max/Min         Max/Min         Max/Min       …
    coolant inventory

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 70

    70                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Part of the technical basis addressing event-specific uncertainties
    will be determined through sensitivity studies. The uncertainty domain
    examined in these sensitivity studies will need to be mapped and translated
    into a calculation matrix. Along with the uncertainty of specific model
    parameters, some characteristics, such as modeling control rod insertion
    and the uncertainty domain must also address event timing. Results from
    the studies will inform the biasing of the final calculations.


    3.4.4 Engineered safety feature single failure
    The principal safety role of the engineered safety features is in support
    of a plant’s critical safety functions. These functions respond to either
    automatic or manual signals from a plant protection instrumentation and
    control (I&C) system (PPICS). The PPICS is responsible for the control of
    plant processes during all postulated operating conditions. It monitors plant
    systems measures, assesses the combination of signals, and, when required,
    actuates plant subsystems required to protect the reactor and supporting
    systems from exceeding design limits. It includes the safety related I&C
    functions of the reactor protection system, the engineered safety features
    actuation system, the containment isolation system, the emergency core
    cooling system and the RCS. As with the systems that interface with the
    PPICS, it is required to be safety-related, meaning it has to be highly reliable
    and designed to be fully single-failure proof.
    Given a set of postulated initiating events, each critical safety function
    (and associated engineered safety features) is assessed for its role in
    responding to the events and for identifying the limiting single failure.
    Event tree analysis is a method borrowed from reliability engineering that
    aids in the organization of this assessment [Lee and McCormick, 2011]. In
    the characterization of DBE scenarios, construction of event trees provides
    a means for exploring plant responses from a postulated initiating event
    combined with one of several single-failure candidates. The completed event
    tree presents a logical model defined by branch success and fail pathways
    that illustrate DBEs sequence of events leading to an expected consequence
    (i.e., design requirement challenge). Common events are identifiable based
    on the expected severity of consequences with respect to a particular design
    requirement. Much less severe events are removed from consideration.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 71

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           71


    The basic methodology emphasizes the preparation of event tree
    diagrams. These event trees model all possible pathways from the initiating
    event. The initiating event represents the trunk of the event tree. It propagates
    into branches representative of the success/failure of the initiating event
    through the states of safety systems that should be activated. This process
    continues until a set of end states is reached. If probabilities are attributed to
    each step, they are then combined at the end. Probabilities are particularly
    useful to screen out incredible events; however, combinations of failures will
    usually result in conditions that better fit as beyond design-basis conditions.
    As such, the use of probabilities is infrequently considered.
    Steps to perform an event tree analysis include the following:

    (1) Define the DBE scenario framework (i.e., the inputs and output
    described in Section 3.4.3).
    (2) Identify the initiating events (apply the hazard and operability analysis
    method of Section 3.4.1).
    (3) Identify limiting plant states assigned as a condition of all analyses.
    (4) Identify initial conditions supporting technical specifications.
    (5) Identify single-failure candidates for each critical safety function.
    (6) Build the event tree diagrams cycling through each critical safety
    function for each initiating event.
    (7) Associate each event with a judgment of impact to a design requirement.
    (8) Identify limiting events by eliminating the more obvious less severe
    events.
    (9) Document the conclusions as the set of DBEs.

    3.5 Common LWR Design-Basis Event Categories
    For LWR technology, the definition of DBE scenarios has been well
    established (e.g., [International Atomic Energy Agency, 2003]). The
    majority of AOOs and postulated accidents are grouped into the following
    six types:

    (1) Increase in heat removal by the secondary system.
    (2) Decrease in heat removal by the secondary system.
    (3) Decrease in RCS flow rate.
    (4) Reactivity and power distribution anomalies.

December 17, 2018    18:5    Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 72

    72                       DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    (5) Increase in reactor coolant inventory.
    (6) Decrease in reactor coolant inventory.

    Table 3.5 summarizes the analysis categories addressed in LWRs,
    identifying these categories by the fission product barrier of interest and the
    principal safety measures. It includes three additional categories that map
    to the containment and equipment survivability critical safety functions.

    Table 3.5. Design-basis analysis categories.

    Critical safety
    functions(s)                    Subject            FP barrier               FOM

    RCS inventory/           Increase in heat          Fuel; RCS       RCS pressure, DNB,
    pressure/heat             removal by                               fuel centerline melt
    removal                   secondary system
    RCS inventory/           Decrease in heat          Fuel; RCS       RCS pressure,
    pressure/heat             removal by                               secondary pressure,
    removal                   secondary system                         DNB, fuel centerline
    melt
    RCS inventory/           Decrease in reactor          Fuel         DNB
    pressure/heat             coolant system
    removal                   flow rate
    Reactivity control       Reactivity and            Fuel; RCS       RCS pressure,
    power distribution                       cladding strain,
    anomaly                                  DNB, fuel centerline
    melt
    RCS inventory/           Increase in RCS           Fuel; RCS       DNB, RCS pressure
    pressure/heat             inventory
    removal
    RCS inventory/           Decrease in RCS           Fuel; RCS       Fuel oxidation, H2
    pressure/heat            inventory                                  production, DNB,
    removal                                                             RCS pressure, peak
    clad temperature
    Containment              Containment              Containment      Temperature, pressure
    temperature and         functional design
    pressure control
    Containment              Combustible gas          Containment      H2 concentration
    combustible gas         control
    control
    Equipment                Emergency core               Fuel         Long-term heat
    qualification and       cooling system                             removal, net positive
    survivability                                                      suction head

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 73

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                           73


    The most limiting active single failure of an engineered safety feature
    associated with each of these events is expected to vary both among the DBE
    categories and the candidate initiating events. The cause of the single active
    failure is not particularly relevant, it is simply assumed to have occurred.
    Furthermore, although the effectiveness of safety-related components may
    be affected by the initiating event, an independent single failure must still be
    considered. For example, for a large-break LOCA analysis of a PWR, safety
    injection to the broken loop is commonly assumed lost to the break, never
    reaching the core [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2000]. A separate
    independent single active failure is assumed to occur, such as the failure of
    a low head safety injection pump. Finally, the effects of a loss-of-offsite
    power are considered, which may impact the delay times before the safety-
    related equipment is powered and available is to be considered, in addition
    to a limiting single active failure.
    The single active failure is assumed to occur when the component is
    called upon to function during the event’s progression. The safety-related
    components are qualified to perform their safety function for the duration
    of the event, i.e., the environment in which they are functioning; therefore,
    initially successful operation of a safety-related component followed by
    failure at some point during the transient is not considered.
    Event progression with multiple failures of safety-related equipment
    is beyond design basis. However, failure of one safety-related component
    that results in subsequent failure of other safety-related components is
    considered a single failure. An example of this is the failure of an
    emergency diesel generator. Subsequently, the safety injection pumps
    powered by the buses of the failed diesel generator will not operate. In
    some cases, inconsistent assumptions may be made regarding the single
    failure. For example, failure of an emergency diesel generator may affect
    both the emergency core cooling safety injection pumps and components
    in the containment spray system. For a large-break LOCA analysis,
    minimizing both pumped safety injection and containment pressure may be
    conservatisms specified in the analysis methodology. For the licensing basis
    analysis, a single failure of a diesel generator may be assumed to minimize
    all pumped ECCS injection; however, it may be inconsistently assumed
    that all aspects of the containment spray system operate as designed in
    order to minimize containment pressure. Alternatively, it may be possible

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 74

    74                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    to demonstrate by analysis that the loss of a low head safety injection pump
    is a more realistic limiting single failure that conservatively reduces both
    pumped ECCS and containment pressure.
    For non-safety related equipment, the assumed operation of the
    equipment in the deterministic safety analysis is considered. If the operation
    of the system as designed is conservative with respect to the event analysis
    and acceptance criterion of interest, then the equipment is assumed to
    operate normally. However, if the operation of the system as designed is
    a benefit to the event progression, then the non-safety related system may
    be assumed to fail. In the stylized deterministic event analysis, the cause of
    this failure is not rigorously determined; it is more simply assumed.
    Loss-of-offsite power is assumed to occur either at the time of the event
    initiation or at the time of turbine trip. This is based on a scenario where
    either an external factor contributes to the initiating event and also results
    in a loss-of-offsite power, or a turbine trip of the relatively large nuclear
    power plant causes sufficient grid instability to result in loss-of-offsite
    power. Although in some cases, loss of power at a particular critical point
    in a transient progression may be more limiting due to the effect on the
    system response. It is not generally required to assume that random failures
    unrelated to the overall event progression occur.
    For PWRs, the large-break LOCA with a concurrent loss-of-offsite
    power and worst single failure, has been historically considered the
    maximum hypothetical accident (see Chapter 8). The reactor’s power
    sensitivity to fluid conditions is such that the maximum hypothetical
    accident in BWRs is less intuitive (see Chapter 9), but often it is not a
    LOCA.


    3.6 Conclusion
    While much has been published on the subject of LWR DBEs, including
    explicit identification of scenarios for licensing applications, the approach
    to DBE characterization is systematic. The method integrates regulatory
    guidance and requirements into a hierarchical approach involving the
    identification of the more important deterministic conditions appearing
    at each tier (i.e., failure mode, limiting plant state, initial conditions and
    critical safety functions/engineered safety features). Analysis of the set of

December 17, 2018   18:5    Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .     9in x 6in   FA    b3381-ch03    page 75

    Design-Basis Event Characterization                               75


    DBEs thus provides verification of the integral design’s resiliency to credible
    scenarios. Incorporation of the single-failure criterion in both design and
    analysis ensures that the nuclear power plants provide two or more ways to
    assure that critical safety functions perform when needed.

    References
    Aldemir, T. (2013). A survey of dynamic methodologies for probabilistic safety assessment
    of nuclear power plants, Ann. Nucl. Energy, Vol. 52, pp. 113–124.
    American Nuclear Society (1973). Nuclear safety criteria for the design of stationary
    pressurized water reactor plants, ANS-18.2-1973.
    American Nuclear Society (1981). Single failure criteria for light water reactor safety-related
    fluid systems, ANSI/ANS-58.9-1981.
    Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (2001). IEEE standard application of the
    single-failure criterion to nuclear power generating station safety systems, IEEE Std
    379-2000.
    International Atomic Energy Agency (1990). Application of the single failure criterion,
    Safety Series No. 50-P-1.
    International Atomic Energy Agency (2002). Accident analysis for nuclear power plants,
    Safety Reports Series No. 23.
    International Atomic Energy Agency (2003). Accident analysis for nuclear power plants
    with pressurized water reactors, Safety Reports Series No. 30.
    International Atomic Energy Agency (2016). Safety of nuclear power plants, specific safety
    requirements, No. SSR-2/1 (Rev 1).
    Lee, J. C. and McCormick, N. J. (2011). Risk and safety analysis of nuclear systems, 1st
    Ed. (John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey).
    Mineck, D. L. (1989). Consideration of postulated electric failure in 10CFR50.46
    ECCS analysis, Iowa Electric Light and Power Company, Duane Arnold Energy
    Center/Docket No: 50-331/Op. License No: DPR-49.
    Root, S. D. and Torres, E. J. (1995). Advanced methods for single failure analysis, Topical
    Meeting on Safety of Operating Reactors, American Nuclear Society, pp. 658–664.
    U.S. Atomic Energy Commission (1957). Theoretical possibilities and consequences of
    major accidents in large nuclear power plants, WASH-740.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1975). Standard review plan for the review of safety
    analysis reports for nuclear power plants: LWR edition, NUREG-75/087.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1976). Staff discussion of fifteen technical issues
    listed in attachment to 3 November 1976 memorandum from director, NRR to NRR
    staff, NUREG-0138.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1977). Single failure criterion, SECY-77-439.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1978). Standard format and content of safety analysis
    report for nuclear power plants, Regulatory Guide 1.70.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1995). Memo from Dennis M. Crutchfield to NRC
    docket file, consolidation of SECY-94-084 and SECY-95-132.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (1999). General design criteria for nuclear power
    plants, 10 CFR 50 Appendix A.

December 17, 2018   18:5   Design-Basis Accident Analysis Methods. . .   9in x 6in   FA   b3381-ch03   page 76

    76                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2000). ECCS evaluation models, 10 CFR 50
    Appendix K.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2004). Final safety evaluation report related to
    certification of the AP1000 standard design, NUREG-1793, Section 15.1.2.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2005a). Risk-informed and performance-based
    alternatives to the single-failure criterion, SECY-05-0138.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2005b). Transient and accident analysis methods,
    Regulatory Guide 1.203.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2007a). Standard review plan — Transient and
    accident analysis, NUREG-0800, Chapter 15.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2007b). Combined license applications for nuclear
    power plants, Regulatory Guide 1.206.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2011). Standard review plan — Introduction,
    NUREG-0800, Chapter 1.

=== Chapter 4 — Analytical Requirements and Software (R.P. Martin, D.L. Aumiller, C. Frepoli) ===
4.1 Analytical Requirements
    One of the many advantages to developing an evaluation model based
    or inspired by Regulatory Guide (RG) 1.203 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory

    77

    78                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Commission, 2005], introduced in Chapter 1, is that the identification of
    the analytical requirements for the software packages is both prescriptive
    and unambiguous. Fundamental to that framework is the Phenomena
    Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT). The PIRT process seeks to identify
    all of the pertinent physical processes for the combination of the reactor
    design and event of interest [Wilson and Boyack, 1998]. To establish the
    analytical requirements for a software package, the complete set of reactor
    designs and events of interest must first be determined. Given its common
    recognition as the maximum hypothetical accident, the LOCA has been
    emphasized. The analytical requirements for the software package are then
    the superset of all of the associated physical phenomena.
    It is important to note that the requirements will be different for
    different nuclear power plant functions and safeguards associated with
    the protection of the principal fission-product barriers: fuel rod, reactor
    coolant system and containment. For instance, fuel temperatures are
    highly sensitive to film boiling heat transfer uncertainties during large-
    break LOCA simulations; however, they have little impact on containment
    pressure and temperature. Multi-dimensional flow in the reactor vessel is
    expected to affect fuel temperatures, but elsewhere, such as in the cold
    leg, pressurizer, accumulators, etc., its consideration is unlikely to have a
    discernable influence.


    4.1.1 Monolithic codes versus integrated code systems
    A first experience that all nuclear safety analysts have on the path to
    specialization is an introduction to the software tools that facilitate transient
    and accident analysis. Even with the prerequisite educational background,
    becoming comfortable with these tools is difficult and time consuming.
    Their complexity reflects the complexity of the problems they solve. Within
    an evaluation model, these tools are often treated as a “black box”. The
    new user’s relationship with these tools is simply one where the user feeds
    the required data to the software, then trusts the software to deliver useful
    information in return. In contrast, the proficient safety analyst understands
    the problem beginning with a heuristic grasp of the physics involving
    their translation into governing and constitutive mathematical expressions,
    their approximation as a model applying the building blocks available in

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         79


    the code, and an expectation of the likely outcome of scenarios being
    investigated.
    Proficiency with the computer codes themselves comes from practice
    and is best pursued in a “top-down” approach, involving a mastery of
    basic functionality and the user interface first, followed by more advanced
    capability aligning with the physics being modeled. There are two primary
    methods for analytically evaluating the complexity of multiple physical
    domains in a nuclear plant. In the first method, all of the various physics
    and related analytical couplings are incorporated into a single, monolithic
    code capable of meeting the evaluation model requirements. Alternatively, a
    collection of codes, each with different capabilities, may be coupled to form
    an integrated analysis tool that collectively addresses the evaluation model
    requirements. The following sections will provide examples, advantages
    and disadvantages for these two methods.

    4.1.1.1 Monolithic code systems
    Contemporary reactor safety analysis codes have been developed using
    the monolithic code system model, including codes like the RELAP5-3D,
    TRACE, CATHARE and ATHLET [The RELAP5-3D Code Development
    Team, 2015; U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2008; Geffraye et al.,
    2011; Burell et al., 1989]. These codes apply a similar set of governing
    equations — sometimes with specialized source or sink terms, to model
    components like the hot leg, cold leg and the reactor core. As such, the
    package of models and correlations is assumed to be broadly applicable over
    varied conditions and scales. For example, the same heat transfer models
    that are applied in the core region may be used in the cold leg or the same
    two-phase flow models may be used in the calculation of reflood as used in
    primary piping. Similarly, the same basic control-volume-based numerical
    solution method is generally applied in vastly different physical settings.
    This approach has been successful in the analysis of phenomena
    associated with design-basis events supporting nuclear power plant licen-
    sing. In many ways, this technique can be seen as the most logical path to
    provide system-level analysis tools. Namely, a base technique, involving a
    set of spatially- and temporally-dependent conservation equations coupled
    via constitutive or closure relations, is developed. By design, the method of
    solution provides acceptable accuracy over a wide range of mathematical

    80                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    characterization (i.e., “nodalization”) strategies and different scenarios.
    Using this technique, specialized models are developed as necessary for
    different components, such as a pump, or different physical models, such
    as liquid level tracking or reflood heat transfer, are added until all of the
    required capabilities for the LOCA analysis have been included in the code.
    There are a number of advantages for users of the single, monolithic
    code. These relate to how the users interface with the code through models,
    execute a simulation, and interpret results. Given that LOCA characteristics
    can be quite complex, the preparation of analyses is similarly challenging.
    A key advantage of the single, monolithic code paradigm is that training
    requirements are significantly reduced relative to integrated code systems
    where several different analysis codes are employed.
    A single, monolithic code also simplifies the user experience with
    the pre-processing of the required input and the post-processing of the
    simulation results. The use of a single code implies that there is a single
    input file containing all of the input required for the simulation and a single
    software executable file. Similarly, single versions of the output files (both
    human readable and binary files for plotting) are generated. The complexity
    of LOCA phenomena and processes can require significant analysis of
    the results to understand the progression of the event. Frequently, this is
    accomplished with the use of large, automated, graphical post-processing
    tools. If only one file for graphing is produced, this task is simplified. First,
    a method for extracting the data from the binary files containing the data for
    plotting typically accompanies the monolithic code. The second, and likely
    larger, advantage is that configuration control of the results becomes simpler
    if there are fewer files to manage. Specifically, the end users need not worry
    as to whether the correct collection of files has been used to perform the
    post-processing of a given LOCA simulation.
    When a monolithic code system is created, the interfaces between
    the various physical domains are an integral part of the code; they are
    considered “tightly” coupled. Accordingly, the interfaces can be tested to
    ensure that mass, energy and momentum is conserved at these boundaries.
    Additionally, these codes typically provide significant error checking of
    the input at these boundaries. In contrast, when various codes are loosely
    coupled, the interfaces between them often belong to no single analysis
    code. As such, it may be impossible to assert that all of the possible

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         81


    combinations of coupling input result are consistent and complete in the
    intended applications. Furthermore, it is difficult or impossible for input
    based error checking to be developed to identify conditions that will violate
    these important conservation properties.
    The final advantage of these large monolithic code systems is related to
    the development of strategies for the use of parallel computing techniques.
    As previously mentioned, LOCA simulations are complex and can require
    significant computing resources to complete a given simulation. To
    reduce the wall-clock time to complete a calculation, parallel computing
    techniques can be provided. In the monolithic code system, one or more
    parallelization strategies can be explicitly incorporated into the code,
    optimized and verified. When an integrated code system is deployed,
    the communication between the different analysis codes results in each
    code being required to pause its computation while waiting to exchange
    information from other computer program(s). This requirement to pause
    is disruptive to the effective and efficient use of the parallel computing
    resources. While specific applications with integrated code systems may be
    optimized, this characteristic is much less prevalent with monolithic codes.

    4.1.1.2 Integrated code systems
    The alternative to a single, monolithic code is to form an integrated analysis
    tool capable of simulating a LOCA from a collection of specialized codes.
    These different, but complementary, analysis codes are integrated using a
    framework that typically controls, among other things, the communication
    between the codes. As previously stated, in these integrated code systems,
    the code users can have significant influence on the physics associated
    with the coupling techniques via the method of communication. For
    example, in the coupling of separate codes for a reactor coolant system
    and containment for a LOCA analysis, the rate of mass and energy transfer
    between domains will depend on the user’s choice for representing the
    effluent at the break plane and how it appears in the containment. The need
    for this information provides the opportunity for the user to make modeling
    decisions that can have a first-order impact on the calculated progression of
    the transient and that could potentially result in a failure to conserve mass,
    energy or momentum at the coupling plane. Often the codes themselves
    constrain how phenomena at the interfaces may be represented. As such,

    82                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    best-estimate simulation may not be possible and the user must apply a
    conservative method to assure a useful application of the integrated code
    system.
    Several frameworks have been developed to support code coupling;
    however, the only openly available framework specifically created for
    an integrated thermal-hydraulic code system is the R5EXEC program
    [Aumiller, et al., 2016]. The R5EXEC name is a rebranding of the tool
    previously called PVMEXEC [Weaver, 2005]. This tool has been used
    to couple RELAP5-3D with several other codes. Specific to the task of
    preparing safety-related LOCA analysis, the coupling of RELAP5-3D to
    the COBRA-IE [Aumiller et al., 2015] and MELCOR [Gauntt, 2005]
    analysis codes provides a good example of the usefulness of integrated
    code systems.
    The primary advantage of an integrated code system is the ability
    to apply physics- and scale-specific models and correlation for different
    regions of the problem domain. For example, this allows for refined reactor
    physics and nodalization techniques where it is most needed. The fluid
    model in the COBRA-IE analysis code was conceived for application in the
    reactor core region, meaning it explicitly considers the unique geometry of
    subchannels (interior, edge and corner), cross flow between subchannels,
    turbulent mixing and heat transfer characteristics. It applies a more complex
    two-fluid model than that used in most system codes, where the difference
    between continuous liquid films and entrained droplets is captured by
    the separate conservation of mass and energy equations. This approach is
    important during the reflood phase of a LOCA. Additionally, the use of this
    “subchannel” formulation improves the prediction of the three-dimensional
    distribution of water in the reactor vessel. These more detailed capabilities
    are in contrast to the typical streamwise one-dimensional nodalization and
    standard two-fluid approaches normally applied in reactor safety codes
    like RELAP5-3D. While these advanced techniques can improve accuracy
    in modeling the reactor core, they are neither needed nor advantageous
    in modeling the remainder of the primary or the secondary systems for
    a LOCA.
    Integrated code systems provide several advantages related to the
    possible reuse of input models for other operational transient analyses.
    Evaluation models are prepared to emphasize phenomena important to the

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         83


    particular event being considered. Model differences between events will
    often be isolated to just one physical domain, served by one computer
    code. Consequently, models describing the other physical domains are
    borrowed from previous efforts, requiring no further development or review.
    Borrowed models will often contain a more detailed representation than
    may otherwise be necessary. For instance, the ability to use steam generator
    models from a steam line rupture calculation for a LOCA analysis would
    represent an increase in fidelity compared to normal LOCA analyses. The
    benefit of improved fidelity is that it very often provides greater margins to
    acceptance criteria.
    For code developers, integrated code systems provide a better code
    development environment relative to the monolithic code systems. With
    the significant differences in important physical phenomena in the reactor
    core and containment, it is likely that the different development teams or
    team members would be committed to each discipline. In the application
    of monolithic code systems, all of the team members are simultaneously
    working within the same source code. As such, the opportunity exists
    for team members to be adversely affecting the contributions of other
    team members. In contrast, in the integrated analysis concept the various
    codes are free to be independently developed, providing the communication
    protocols are not altered.


    4.1.1.3 Numerically-stable solution considerations
    One of the challenges associated with the development and use of either
    monolithic or integrated code systems is the ability to provide a numerically
    stable solution. This challenge is particularly acute for scenarios involving
    high rates of mass and energy transport, such as in LOCA scenarios. The
    solution methods used by reactor safety codes typically fall into one of these
    three types.
    The first method is the semi-implicit [Liles and Reed, 1978], single-
    shot linearization method. In this method implicit evaluation is used only
    for those terms responsible for the sonic wave propagation time step limit
    and those phenomena known to have small time constants. Thus, implicit
    evaluation is used for the velocity in the mass and energy transport terms,
    the pressure gradient in the momentum equations, and the interface mass

    84                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    and momentum exchange terms. In single-shot linearization, time-level
    evaluations are selected so the resulting implicit terms are linear in the new
    time variables. Where it is necessary to retain nonlinearities, Taylor series
    expansions about old time values are used to obtain a formulation linear
    in the new time variables. (Higher-order terms are neglected.) Linearity
    results in improving computing speed by eliminating the need to iteratively
    solve systems of nonlinear equations. In this method, numerical stability
    is assured by limiting the maximum time step size to the material Courant
    limit:
         
    x
    tsemi-implicit ≤ min         ,                   (4.1)
    V
    where x and V are the length of the computional cell and the fluid velocity,
    respectively. By comparison, a fully-explicit method would require the time
    step size to be less than the sonic Courant Limit.
            
    x
    tfully explicit ≤ min            ,             (4.2)
    Vsound
    where Vsound is the speed of sound in the fluid.
    The second method is the SETS [Mahaffy, 1982] or one of its
    descendants. This method uses a predictor/corrector methodology in which
    the different conservation equations are addressed twice per time step. The
    final method, like that used by CATHARE [Geffraye et al., 2011], utilizes
    a fully iterative method.
    In integrated code applications, optimal solution efficiency involves
    limiting the communication between the different analysis codes. As
    previously mentioned, the communication process is disruptive in the
    solution process, as it requires the programs to wait until the other codes
    are ready to communicate with them. To minimize communication, a
    fully explicit coupling algorithm is the most efficient. In this method, one
    set of data exchanges could be made per time step, or on an even less
    frequent basis. The use of old-time value at the coupling location has the
    unfortunate effect of significantly reducing the stability of the coupling
    algorithms. Aumiller et al. [2001] showed that the numerical instability
    associated with the explicit coupling could affect the results in a CFD/
    RELAP5-3D calculation. As a result, a semi-implicit coupling algorithm

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         85


    was developed [Weaver et al., 2002] and was used in a subsequent coupled
    CFD/RELAP5-3D work [Aumiller et al., 2002] that demonstrated the
    enhanced numerical stability of the method.
    The use of the semi-implicit coupling algorithm is required only when
    the conditions on both sides of the coupling location are changing at
    timescales that are on the same order as the frequency at which the data
    is being transmitted. If the conditions on one side of the coupling plane are
    changing much slower than the communication frequency, explicit coupling
    algorithms can be deployed without any loss in stability. Fortunately, this
    is often the case when containment analysis codes are coupled with a
    thermal-hydraulic system code in an integrated analysis of a LOCA [Martin,
    1995]. Since the timescales associated with the thermal-hydraulic response
    within a large containment are typically on the order of seconds, it is
    possible to employ the simpler explicit coupling algorithm for this use.
    The ability of the integrated code system to use both semi-implicit and
    explicit coupling algorithms simultaneously in the same analysis highlights
    the advantage of the integrated code system. Notably, that it can use the
    most appropriate solution method for different physical domains based on
    the required accuracy and stability of the integrated code system, while
    minimizing computational resources.


    4.2 Thermal-Hydraulic Modeling of Two-Phase Flow
    Accurate simulation of two-phase thermal-hydraulics in the more common
    large system codes relies on the two-fluid model. Conservation equations
    are solved describing the conservation of mass, of momentum and of
    energy for a two-phase (liquid and vapor) working fluid plus conservation
    of mass equations for a non condensable gas (e.g., nitrogen), residing in
    the working fluid vapor, and a liquid solute (e.g., boron), residing in the
    working fluid liquid. The independent variables in this model are the phasic
    velocities, the phasic energies or enthalpies, the pressure, the void fraction,
    non-condensable quality and solute density. The non-condensable gas and
    the liquid solute are assumed to have the same velocity and temperature as
    the working fluid phase where they reside, eliminating the requirement for
    separate momentum and energy equations. The most significant aspect of
    the two-fluid model is that it permits the two phases of the working fluid

    86                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    to have different velocities (non-homogeneous) and different temperatures
    (non-equilibrium).
    Associated with the governing equations are model parameters that
    affect the storage and rates-of-change in the conserved properties (i.e.,
    mass, momentum and energy). Determining all the associated models and
    correlations for the set of governing equations is referred to as closure.
    Individual models and correlations are known as closure or constitutive
    relations (or equations). Constitutive relations complete the governing
    equations with mathematical expressions that capture the assumptions
    about processes and phenomena occurring within a control volume.
    Examples of constitutive relationships include expressions for friction
    factors, heat transfer coefficients, the work of a pump and the energy from
    a nuclear reactor. Consequently, the two-phase models can be viewed as a
    collection of conservation equations and constitutive relationships.
    Thermal or “heat structure” models enable a code to calculate
    temperatures and internal energy within or across physical structures in
    direct contact with a fluid such as fuel, steam generator tubes, vessels,
    pipes, etc. Constitutive relations for conduction, convection and radiation
    couple the thermal and hydraulic physics domains as the energy transfer
    between structures and the fluid.
    Geometry has a significant influence on solution accuracy. The common
    heat structure model has finite volume, described in rectangular, cylindrical
    or spherical coordinates. The nonlinear relationship of material properties,
    such as thermal-conductivity and heat capacity, with temperature, are
    typically accommodated through the tabulation of data reflecting that
    dependency.
    The remainder of this chapter reviews the origins and bases for three
    two-phase flow models in reverse order of complexity, beginning with
    the non-homogeneous, non-equilibrium two-fluid model, distinguished
    by separate balance equations for mass, momentum and energy, and an
    explicit description of interfacial transport processes. This is followed by
    the five-equation drift flux model, which has separate balance equations
    for mass and energy and one mixture momentum equation; mechanical
    non-equilibrium is calculated by a full range of drift flux correlations for
    horizontal and vertical flow conditions. Lastly, a homogeneous equilibrium
    fluid model with a complete set of constitutive relations is described.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         87


    4.3 Two-Fluid Governing Equations
    Two-phase flows involve multiple phenomenological domains appearing
    at various physical scales. To represent this multi-physics, multi-scale
    problem, all thermal-hydraulic system codes apply a governing set of
    conservation equations. Applicability and accuracy is generally a function
    of modeling detail and complexity that begins with the form of the
    governing equations.
    Thermal-hydraulic system codes apply a set of governing or field
    equations used to model the two-phase fluid flow. “Governing equations”
    refer to equations for the conservation of mass, energy and momentum of the
    working fluid and, optionally, a non-condensable gas and/or a liquid solute.
    These equations are solved to provide predictions of the spatial distribution
    of liquid, steam and non-condensable mass as well as the velocity and energy
    state for each phase. While frequently used synonymously with “governing
    equations”, the term “field” may also be used in a more descriptive context
    to convey the degree of complexity assumed in the fluid model. The
    simplest two-fluid model considers two fields, liquid and steam; however,
    the complexity of the two-fluid model may be increased by the addition of a
    separate field equation describing bubbles and/or droplets. The COBRA-IE
    subchannel code applies a two-fluid, three-field model (with the third field
    being droplets). The equations presented below reflect the two-fluid model
    credited in RELAP5 and TRACE. Their derivation can be found in the
    respective code documentation, reflecting the large body of original research
    and development efforts (e.g., [Ishii, 1975; Ransom, 1989; Stewart and
    Wendroff, 1984]).
    The development of this two-fluid model has received broad scrutiny
    and debate (e.g., [Wulff, 2011]). A reoccurring criticism of this model is
    that the standard set of equations is not hyperbolic, implying the condition
    of “ill-posedness” (e.g., [Ransom and Hicks, 1984; Bestion, 2008]). In
    practice, it has been shown that the equation set can be numerically
    solved without being influenced by the mathematical characteristic of
    ill-posedness. To create a hyperbolic set of equations, some codes such
    as CATHARE utilize a two-pressure model [Geffraye et al., 2011]. In this
    model, each phase is assumed to exist at a pressure different from the other.
    The equations that will be presented below represent the more common
    single-pressure, yet formally ill-posed, equation set.

    88                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    4.3.1 Conservation of mass
    The phasic conservation mass equations are the most important equations to
    be solved for a LOCA simulation. For these transients, the ability to predict
    accurately the maximum clad temperature (as required by regulations) is
    directly tied to accurate predictions of system inventory and its distribution
    within the system. LOCA analyses represent a race between the ability of
    the rods to heat up, often on a near adiabatic trajectory, toward the regulatory
    limit and the ability to refill the reactor core to provide sufficient cooling
    to the hottest locations. As such, the ability of a thermal-hydraulic systems
    code to predict the transient mass of fluid in the system as a necessary, but
    not sufficient, requirement.
    For the two-phase code, the one-dimension conservation of mass
    equation can be written as
    time rate of change     advection
                          source/sink
    ∂               ∂                 
    (αk ρk ) + (αk ρk vkz ) = k ,                      (4.3)
    ∂t              ∂z
    where αk is the volume fraction for phase k, ρk is the density of phase k, vkz is
    the velocity of phase k in the z-direction and k is the per unit volume phasic
    source or sink term for phase k. For the mass equation, the only source or
    sink for the liquid and vapor phases of water is interfacial mass transfer;
    namely, boiling, flashing, evaporation (in the presence of non-condensables)
    and condensation. In order to conserve mass, the relationship between the
    phasic terms at the interface (also known as the jump conditions) can be
    written as
    −l = v = ,                                 (4.4)
    which states that a given mass of liquid gained is balanced by the loss of an
    equivalent amount of vapor.
    In practice, the phasic conservation equations can either be solved as
    written or using a linear combination of the phasic equations. If the linear
    combination is taken to be the sum of the equations, the mixture equation
    is produced. The mixture equations provide the information concerning the
    total water mass in the problem. The RELAP5 [U.S. Department of Energy,
    2015] series of codes uses the mixture, or sum, equation with the linear
    combination of equations formed from subtracting the vapor phase from
    the liquid phase. As expressed in the manual, “the reason for using this
    form is the ease of degeneration of the model to the single-phase case”.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                                       89


    4.3.2 Conservation of energy
    As previously stated, the inventory of liquid water is of primary concern to
    the prediction of the safety of a LWR under LOCA conditions. The boiling
    and/or flashing of the reactor coolant represents a primary means by which
    liquid water is removed from the RCS. Since it is the energy state driving
    fluid flashing and interfacial mass transfer, the energy equations are typically
    considered the next most important conservation equation.
    Significant thermal non-equilibrium is common during a LOCA. As
    such, thermal-hydraulic system codes must be able to predict thermal
    non-equilibrium between the fluid phases. Specifically, the codes must
    be able to predict stable (Tl < Tsat and Tv > Tsat ) and meta-stable
    conditions (Tl > Tsat and Tv < Tsat ). Interfacial heat transfer (denoted as
    the product qik Ai ) is included in the phasic energy equations. This energy
    is commonly described as the transfer of energy from the fluid at its phasic
    temperature to a massless interface that exists at a saturation temperature.
    The interfacial heat flux (qik ) is defined using an analog of Newton’s Law of
    Cooling.

    qik = h ik (Tsat − Tk ).                                      (4.5)

    The energy equation can be written in a number of ways. For instance,
    it can be written in terms of internal energy or enthalpy and it can be solved
    using internal energy, enthalpy or temperature as the independent parameter.
    A common form of the equation is given as
    time rate of change               advection
                       
    ∂             ∂
    [(αρh )k ] + [(αρvz h )k ] =
    0               0
    ∂t             ∂z
    pressure work                   wall heat transfer
    gravity        
                                                
                ∂αk     ∂                                            
    Aw qwk                (4.6)
    − (αρvz )k gz − p     + p (αk vkz ) +
    ∂t    ∂z                                          V
    interfacial heat transfer
                         energy with mass transfer
    Ai qik                           
    +                               +           k h 0ki
    V
    In this equation, h 0k is the phasic enthalpy and h 0ki represents the phasic
    enthalpy associated with mass transfer A and V are unit area (i.e., wall

    90                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    and interface) and volume. For a system in thermal equilibrium, this would
    represent a saturated phasic enthalpy. However, in the case of thermal non-
    equilibrium the use of purely saturated enthalpies for the interfacial terms
    can lead to non-physical results. To avoid this problem, the calculation of the
    effective enthalpy is chosen based on the direction of mass transfer. Namely,
    the disappearing phase uses the local phasic enthalpy and the appearing
    phase uses the saturated value. In other words, the disappearing phase takes
    all of its energy with it, while the appearing phase is born at the saturated
    value.
    In order to conserve energy, the sum of the last two terms in the energy
    equation must be equal to 0.0 when summed over the liquid and vapor
    phases.
    l h li0 V + qil Ai = v h 0vi V + qiv
    
    Ai .                           (4.7)
    Rearranging the equation and remembering the relationship between the
    liquid and vapor side interfacial mass transfer terms allows us to develop
    an equation for the interfacial mass transfer, as a function of the interfacial
    heat transfer rates and the effective enthalpies.
    
    qiv + qil Ai
    =−             0
    .                           (4.8)
    h vi − h li0 V

    4.3.3 Conservation of momentum
    The momentum equation provides the relationship between phasic
    momenta, or velocities, and the applied pressure gradient. Written in
    conservative form, the streamwise phasic momentum equation for the z-
    direction is written as
    time rate of change           advection
                         
    ∂              ∂
    [(αρvz )k ] + [(αρvz vz )k ] =
    ∂t              ∂z
    Pressure Gradient                                  wall shear
                        gravity body force       
    ∂                                         Aw τkw .                   (4.9)
    − ( pαk ) −                 αk ρ k g z       −
    ∂z                                              V
    interfacial shear
                    momentum transfer by mass transfer
    Ai τki                             
    +                k vki
    V

    Analytical Requirements and Software                               91


    In this expression, the final two terms must sum to zero when the phasic
    equations are added together to form the mixture equation. In practice, the
    terms are typically treated individually instead of as a sum. Namely,

    τli Ai = −τvi Ai and vli l V = −vvi v V.                          (4.10)

    The interfacial shear term is typically written as
    1
    τli = f i ρ vv2 − vl2 ,                    (4.11)
    2
    where the interfacial friction factor and the phasic density to be used in the
    expression depend on the flow topology, which will be described later.
    Note that in the fully conservative form of the momentum equation
    provided above, the time rate of change is written for momentum. Instead,
    the non-conservative form of the equation can be derived. This starts by
    applying the chain rule to the momentum equation to obtain:
    ∂                          ∂             ∂
    [(αρvz )k V ] = V (vzk ) (αρ)k + (αρ)k (vz )k .                              (4.12)
    ∂t                         ∂t            ∂t
    A similar exercise can be carried out on the advection term. The phasic
    mass equations can be multiplied by the phasic velocity. When the terms
    containing the derivatives of macroscopic density (αρ) are eliminated,
    the result of this exercise is the non-conservative form of the momentum
    equation:
    time rate of change               advection
                             
    ∂                  ∂
    V (αρ)k (vkz ) + V (αρvz )k (vkz ) =
    ∂t                  ∂z
    Pressure Gradient
              gravity body force
       .
    wall shear                           (4.13)
    ∂                  
    −z ( pαk Az ) − αk ρk Vg sin θ − τkw Pkw z
    ∂z
    interfacial shear       momentum transfer by mass transfer
                                      
    τki Ai        +          (vki − vkz )k V
    The RELAP5-3D and TRACE analysis codes utilize the non-
    conservative form of the momentum as it has several advantages. First,
    implementation provides for simpler numerical methods since the velocity,
    that is required for calculating the advection of mass and energy is

    92                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    directly calculated. In codes that utilize the conservative form of the
    momentum equation, such as the COBRA series of codes, the velocity
    must be calculated from the conserved momenta. Another advantage is
    that the phase appearance and disappearance can naturally be treated
    with constraints on velocity rather than momentum, since in the limit as
    αk → 0, the momentum will approach zero independent of the phasic
    velocity. It should be noted that the non-conservative form does have
    several disadvantages, notably velocity is not a conserved quantity. As
    such, the Taylor series expansion that is done to form the discrete forms
    of the equations is less accurate than when the conservative form is used.
    Additionally, the non-conservative form of the equations is incapable of
    capturing shock phenomena or hydraulic jumps.

    4.4 Model Closure and Resolving Interfacial Phenomena
    The previously described set of governing equations actually contains more
    variables than equations. Model closure is the task of resolving those
    variables that are outside of the governing equation set. Among these
    variables in the described two-fluid model are contributions from large-
    scale processes like work on the fluid from a pump or energy from a nuclear
    reactor. It also includes smaller-scale phenomena like wall friction and
    fluid properties. Contributions from those sources are relatively easy to
    describe (see Section 4.7). The complexity of a two-phase hydrodynamic
    model closure resides in the derivation and solution of constitutive relations
    addressing interfacial phenomena. These are commonly resolved by
    applying flow-regime-dependent models for interphase friction (drag) and
    mass and heat transfer. Additional constitutive relations include solutions
    for the coefficient of virtual mass, wall friction, wall heat transfer and direct
    (sensible) heat transfer.
    Model closure solutions for systems codes are derived in a practical
    manner such that they may be applied with reasonable effort. Contemporary
    understanding of liquid-vapor two-phase flows supports closure through
    mechanistic methods. Older methods like the semi-empirical drift flux
    model (Section 4.5) and the fully empirical model of the earliest system
    codes (Section 4.6) still find application where solution expediency is valued
    over the high fidelity and resolution.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         93


    4.4.1 Mechanistic model
    In two-phase thermal-hydraulic system codes, physical resolution is at the
    scale of an idealized control volume with assumptions about the geometry
    and topology of the contained structure and fluid. Consequently, any
    “mechanistic solution” may be subject to debate. As previously noted,
    the basic two-phase flow field equations must be supplemented by a
    number of closure models and correlation equations. These equations
    describe the transfer of mass, momentum and energy between the steam-
    water phases as well as the interaction of these phases with the system
    structure and interfacing sources, and sinks of work or energy. Mathematical
    modeling of separate phases must consider the many competing processes
    and phenomena, thus any reasonably accurate model is represented by a
    compilation of constitutive equations assembled in a patchwork of domains
    of applicability.
    Because the nature of these interactions has been found to be strongly
    dependent on the flow topology, a flow-regime-dependent constitutive
    equation package is the most common mechanistic solution for thermal-
    hydraulic codes based on the two-fluid model. The accuracy of a calculated
    solution depends on the ability of this package to recognize flow regimes
    adequately and to supply appropriate correlations. Through testing, several
    flow regimes have been characterized in terms of measurable, system-
    code-scale conditions of phasic velocities, void fraction, heat transfer and
    geometry. The data collected have been compiled into “flow regime maps”.
    The work of Taitel and Dukler [1976], Taitel et al. [1980] and Ishii [Ishii
    and Chawla, 1979; Ishii and Mishima, 1980; Ishii and De Jarlais, 1982] are
    commonly cited in this approach.
    Figure 4.1 presents a frequently cited flow regime map for flow in a
    horizontal pipe [Mandhane et al., 1974]. This map represents a compilation
    of a large amount of experimental data, presented in terms of superficial
    liquid and vapor velocities. As an empirical model, its application is limited
    to the data on which it is based. To account for the effects of other variables,
    such as fluid type or pipe diameter, additional information is necessary as
    either new maps or correlations.
    In liquid-vapor (or gas) flows, the two phases can exist in a wide
    variety of forms. Hubbard and Dukler [1966] provide one of the earliest
    explanations of the flow regime approach, suggesting three basic flow

    94                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 4.1. Experimental flow pattern map [Mandhane et al., 1974], air-water system
    (horizontal pipe).


    patterns: separated, intermittent and distributed flow. In separated flows,
    both phases are continuous, although droplets or bubbles of one phase may
    appear in the other. Geometrically, separated flows appear as either stratified
    or annular. In stratified flow, the phases are typically separated by gravity in
    horizontal piping. In annular flow, a liquid film resides along the pipe wall
    while the vapor or gas phase moves in the center of the pipe. This is more
    common in vertical piping.
    In intermittent flow regimes, at least one phase is discontinuous and
    neither phase is particularly dominant in terms of volume fraction. When the
    liquid volume fraction is greater than the vapor volume fraction, intermittent
    flow may appear as elongated bubbles. With increasing vapor volume
    fraction, this kind of bubble flow appears as slug or plug flow. In vertical
    flows and prior to transitioning to a separated flow condition, the flow may
    be considered as churn or froth flow. Dispersed flow is common at very low
    and very high void fractions where only one phase is continuous and the
    other phase resides as either bubbles or droplets.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         95


    4.4.2 Flow patterns in horizontal and vertical pipes
    As previously noted, two-phase flow regimes or patterns are sensitive to
    velocities, void fraction, heat transfer and geometry. All of which complicate
    the closure of the two-fluid model. In practice, the solution techniques
    adopted in computer codes first consider the orientation and direction of the
    flow field to be either horizontal or vertical, before applying correlations
    that consider the effects of velocity, etc.
    In Figure 4.2, the flow patterns may be observed in horizontal pipes
    that are illustrated schematically. The two-phase flow progression is one
    that might occur in a heated section. Heating of a single-phase liquid will
    generate bubbles, eventually separating from the wall to flow in the bulk
    liquid. As the fluid progresses along the heated section, the bubbly flow
    transitions to plug, then slug flow as the bubbles coalesce. Continuing
    along the heated section, the bubbles lose their shape, elongating. Gravity
    encourages phasic separation and the flow stratifies, first appearing wavy,
    then as a film. Droplets will depart the continuous liquid phase and flow
    with the continuous vapor phase. Eventually, when the pipe wall dries out
    and the droplets and vapor equilibrate, the flow becomes a single-phase
    vapor.
    Figure 4.3 illustrates the flow patterns that may be observed in a vertical
    flow. The progression is similar to that of a horizontal flow. The bubbly flow
    regime is characterized by bubbles stripped from nucleation sites along
    the pipe wall. Further bubble generation results in coalescence to form
    larger, longer, cap-shaped bubbles. These large bubbles are often referred

    Fig. 4.2. Horizontal flow regimes.

    96                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 4.3. Vertical flow regimes.


    to as Taylor bubbles. For example, slug flow consists of Taylor bubbles,
    separated by regions of bubbly flow. In churn or froth flow, the bubbles and
    the slugs become highly distorted and appear to merge into a vapor core
    surrounded by an annular liquid film attached to the wall. Like in the heated
    horizontal pipe example, continued heating leads to a single-phase vapor
    flow. The situation in a vertical pipe is compounded by a decrease in pressure
    with elevation (decreased body force). This pressure decrease increases the
    volume of the vapor phase, contributing to the growth of bubbles, slugs and
    the vapor core.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         97


    The application of flow regime maps into thermal-hydraulic system
    codes is complicated by the intended application. For practical use, the
    models and correlations describing two-phase flow topology are only as
    good and complete as the available data. Applicability to nuclear power
    plant transients and accidents requires data considering pressure up to
    200 bar, temperature up to 650 K and mass fluxes that can exceed several
    hundred kg/s-m2 . In addition, pipe inclination can have a very strong
    influence on flow pattern transitions. In particular, deviations from the
    horizontal tend to diminish the separation between the gas and the liquid
    phases. Generally, data for inclined pipes is not well populated; however,
    data exists in unique situations such as reflux condensation during small
    break LOCAs, which also involves counter-current flow (liquid and vapor
    moving in opposite directions).
    In models for the related flow regime transitions, the dependences
    on key system variables and parameters are incorporated to the extent
    that they can maximize the applicability of the thermal-hydraulic system
    code. Figure 4.4 is an illustration from the RELAP5-3D Theory Manual
    [U.S. Department of Energy, 2015], conceptualizing the flow regimes as a
    function of phasic velocities, void fraction and temperature.

    Fig. 4.4. Schematic of a vertical flow regime map from RELAP5-3D [U.S. Department of
    Energy, 2015].

    98                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    As implied in Figure 4.4, the flow regime is also sensitive to wall
    heat transfer regime. This means that not only do flow regimes need to be
    tracked, but also heat transfer regimes as well, and these two regimes do
    not necessarily align. The most complex situation considered in nuclear
    power system applications are the flow and heat transfer regimes during
    core reflooding. Large axial variations of wall temperature and heat fluxes
    occur in a very narrow region close to the quench front during reflooding.
    Since fine resolution of the fuel temperature profile is typically required in
    the quantification of safety margins, a smaller phenomenological scale must
    be considered; as such, a large number of axial nodes are required. That said,
    this is only useful when power is the dominant phenomena determining fuel
    temperature as system codes have limited capability for resolving flow field
    phenomena on very small scales. Similarly, the availability of test data at
    such scales is also limited.


    4.5 Drift Flux Model
    Many applications do not require the complexity of the mechanistic model.
    The drift flux model is a simplification to the mechanistic two-fluid model
    that provides the benefit of calculation expediency with only a modest loss
    in fidelity. It is still applied in several thermal-hydraulic system codes in use
    today, such as RAMONA [Rohatgi et al., 1996], and is a numerical solution
    option in ATHLET [Burell et al., 1989]. It can adequately describe both
    thermal and mechanical non-equilibrium with five governing equations —
    two phasic mass balances, two phasic energy balances and one momentum
    balance. In contrast to the mechanistic model with six (or eight) independent
    variables, the common drift flux model resolves the phasic velocities, the
    phasic energies (or enthalpies) and pressure. Void fraction is resolved with
    a drift flux relationship to the phasic velocities.
    The momentum balance in the drift flux model is a combination of
    the two phasic momentum equations. Since with two-phase flow there is
    often some relative motion between liquid and gas, the single momentum
    equation needs to recover the information that was lost by combining
    the two equations. In the drift flux model, the missing information in
    the momentum equation is given by algebraic constitutive relationships
    between the velocities of the phases and void fraction.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                         99


    The characteristic of the drift flux model is that the relationship
    between the phasic velocities and void fraction is so well correlated
    with experimental data corresponding to specific flow regimes. There is
    both a mathematical and physical basis for this relationship. A detailed
    presentation of the drift flux model is presented in Wallis [1969] and Collier
    [1981], drawing on the concept developed by Zuber and Findley [1965]. The
    model defines the drift velocity, vk, j , as the velocity of phase k, vk , relative
    to the two-component liquid-gas mixture, j , which is the volumetric flux
    (or superficial velocity).

    vk, j = vk − j.                               (4.14)

    The volumetric flux, which is the total liquid and gas volumetric flow per
    unit area, is given by
    Q tot   Qf   Qg
    j=          =    +    = j f + jg ,                        (4.15)
    A      A    A
    where j f and jg are the volumetric flux of the liquid and gas phases,
    respectively. These quantities are equal to or less than the actual liquid
    or gas velocity depending on the vapor void fraction; that is:

    j f = (1 − αg )v f                             (4.16)

    and

    jg = α g vg .                              (4.17)

    The usefulness of the volumetric flux comes from its relationship to
    flow measures that are experimentally observable.
    The drift flux model recognizes that in two-phase flows, the local
    velocity and local void fraction vary across the channel dimension,
    perpendicular to the direction of flow. It accounts for the flow pattern created
    by the non-uniform distribution of both the velocity and concentration
    profiles, as shown in Figure 4.5. Two bounding cases bookend the flow
    domain and describe simple flow problems that can be easily solved by
    a single momentum equation. If the two phases are uniformly mixed, the
    concentration and velocity profiles will be flat (assuming there is no wall
    friction), and the local and average flow velocities are the same. If the
    liquid is stationary while a gas rises through the stationary liquid, the

    100                      DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 4.5. Fluid velocity and concentration profiles in a two-phase pipe flow.

    liquid velocity component is zero. The drift flux model provides a bridge
    between these two extremes in terms of the volumetric flux. Mathematically,
    that bridge involves describing the relationship between the velocity and
    concentration profiles. Physically, specific flow regimes are distinguishable
    by their unique velocity and concentration profiles.
    Common representations of velocities, energies, void fraction, etc., in
    fluid models are averages and are not necessarily equivalent with a rigorous
    formulation, considering the geometry and topology of the flow. Because the
    local and average properties are typically different, the product of averages
    is not the same as the average of a product. For example, the momentum
    flux in a pipe with a velocity profile, but uniform density, is:
    
    ρ v 2 d A = Aρv 2 ,                       (4.18)

    which is not the same as:
              2
    vd A
    Aρ                    = Aρv2 .                       (4.19)
    A

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          101


    While these quantities are not the same, the ratio
    v2
    (4.20)
    vv
    will be relatively close to one. Note, that in these equations the operator
      denotes an average of the parameter over the cross section. That is, for
    parameter X , X  is:
    
    1
    X  =       X d A.                     (4.21)
    A A
    Addressing the concentration profile involves mean weighting the
    velocity/volumetric fluxes by the void fraction as follows:
    α X 
    X̄ =           .                            (4.22)
    α
    With the previous definitions and equalities, the void fraction weighted
    mean gas velocity is defined as:
    αg vg 
    vg =              .                           (4.23)
    αg 
    Applying the operator function of Equation (4.22) for the terms in
    Equation (4.14), Equation (4.23) becomes:
     jg    αg vg    αg j  αg vg, j 
    vg =          =          =        +                            (4.24)
    αg      αg       αg     αg 
    and further reformulated as:
    αg j           αg vg, j 
    vg =               j +                               (4.25)
    αg  j           αg 
    or
    vg = C0  j  + vg, j ,                          (4.26)
    where vg, j = αg vg, j /αg  and C0 is the distribution parameter,
    αg j 
    C0 =                .                         (4.27)
    αg  j 
    As described above, the form of C0 reflects the geometry and topology
    of the flow field, that is, the flow regime or flow pattern. With the
    two parameters, the distribution/profile parameter C0 and drift velocity

    102                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    vg, j , interfacial conditions can be calculated from the superficial velocity
    (αg j ) or velocities (αg jl  and αg jg ). When C0 and vg, j are constant,
    Equation (4.26) shows that a linear relation exists between vg and  j .
    The slope of such a line gives the value of distribution parameters that can
    be easily determined from experiments, even when the measured profiles
    required for the direct calculation of C0 are not available. In addition,
    any abrupt changes in the value of C0 and vg suggest a change of flow
    pattern in the conduct of the experiment. Lastly, the relationship between
    vapor void fraction αg  and the drift velocity is obtained by rearranging
    Equations (4.25) and (4.26), giving:
     jg 
    αg  =                    .                        (4.28)
    C 0  j  + vg j

    Figure 4.6 illustrates the drift flux model’s breadth of applicability in
    terms of volumetric flux, void fraction and various flow regimes.

    Fig. 4.6. Volumetric flux versus void fraction for various flow regimes.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          103


    In practice, the drift flux model has been shown to be particularly
    applicable to flows where the liquid phase is continuous (bubble,
    slug/plug and churn). Derived expressions for C0 and vgd and other flow-
    pattern-dependent void fraction correlations have been derived by many.
    For example, in a subsequent publication by Zuber et al. [1967], they found
    that a form of vg, j , without reference to a particular flow pattern, is:
                   
    σ g(ρl − ρg ) 0.25
    vg, j = K                      ,                  (4.29)
    ρl2
    where C0 = 1.13 and K = 1.41.

    4.6 The FLASH Fluid Model Case Study
    In practice, two-phase flow modeling is a challenging effort, often involving
    a large staff specializing in fluid flow, heat transfer and reactor physics. As
    highlighted previously, interfacial characteristics are the principal source
    of complexity in two-phase flow modeling. With further simplification,
    the two-phase fluid model can be cast into a form that is more accessible
    for software verification of larger-scale codes or simply for educational
    purposes. The two-phase flow model of the original FLASH code [Margolis
    and Redfield, 1966] provides such an illustration of the fundamental
    requirements and organization for fluid flow modeling.
    FLASH is best described as a “node and branch” design. This approach
    assumed that the spatial elements (nodes) are capable of energy and mass
    storage only. The nodes are connected by branches that model resistances
    and contributions to fluid flow. Thus, the conservation-of-momentum is
    written for each branch, while the conservation-of-energy and -mass are
    written for each node. This aligned well with the state of knowledge
    at that time. Notably, while there was a good understanding of the
    properties of water and steam as separate entities, there was relatively
    little understanding of two-phase properties of water coolant. To address
    the possibility of their coexistence, early computer models made two key
    assumptions that allowed them to apply what they knew about water and
    still receive reasonable answers. These were (1) water and steam move as a
    homogeneous mass, and (2) the temperature of water and steam appearing
    together are equal (i.e., in thermal equilibrium). With these assumptions,
    the governing equations and associated constitutive relations describing a

    104                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    control volume’s thermal-hydraulic state need only to consider the mass,
    momentum and energy transport of a single-phase homogenized fluid,
    which means a single equation for each conserved property.

    4.6.1 FLASH governing equations
    For application on early digital computers, the developers of FLASH
    needed an efficiently constructed model that incorporated only the content
    necessary to accomplish its objective. That objective for LWR LOCA
    simulation is to estimate the loads that might threaten system integrity.
    Those loads are realized depending on the physical phenomena present;
    however, those of interest for design-basis LWR system integrity are pri-
    marily hydrodynamic and thermal, i.e., pressure and temperature. Ideally,
    the derived governing equations provide an explicit expression of these
    figures-of-merit.
    Pressure and temperature are not only measures of hydrodynamic and
    thermal loads; they are also two intensive fluid properties. By the state
    postulate of thermodynamics, the state of a system in thermodynamic
    equilibrium is completely specified by two independent, intensive
    properties. Notably, pressure and temperature are not independent in
    two-phase conditions, but are determinable from any two other intensive
    properties. As such, the task of solution closure is simplified since we can
    directly evaluate these loads from a well-formed set of governing equations
    dependent on two-fluid intensive properties.
    With the figures-of-merit (almost) resolved, the derivation of the
    governing equations begins by considering mass conservation in a nuclear
    power plant reactor coolant system. For the lumped parameter system
    conceptualized in FLASH, the expression of relating mass balance between
    in-flows (ṁ in ) and out-flows (ṁ out ) to storage (M) is:
    dM
    = ṁ in − ṁ out .                            (4.30)
    dt
    Unlike pressure and temperature, mass is an extensive property;
    however, by reformulating the mass conservation equation as a volume
    conservation equation, an expression in terms of another intensive property,
    specific volume, can be derived. This volume equation relates the system
    volume (V ) to the system mass (M), the ratio of which is specific

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          105


    volume (v):
    dV       d             dv        dM
    = 0 = (Mv) = M           +v
    dt      dt             dt        dt
    dv
    =M     + v(ṁ in − ṁ out ).                             (4.31)
    dt
    The derivation of the total lumped, stagnate system energy equation (E o )
    is similar, but it includes the contribution from core power and structure
    stored energy ( Q̇ net ):
    d Eo
    = (ṁh o )in − (ṁh o )out + Q̇ net .                 (4.32)
    dt
    The total energy of the system is approximated as the product of system
    mass and internal energy:
    d              de       dM
    E o ≈ Me →      (Me) = M           +e
    dt              dt       dt
    de
    =M    + e(ṁ in − ṁ out ).                          (4.33)
    dt
    This outcome reflects a translation from a model based on the extensive
    properties of mass (M) and energy (Me) to one based on the intensive
    properties of specific volume (v) and internal energy (e). The next step is
    to translate this model to the preferred set of intensive properties that relate
    to physical and measurable loads: pressure (P) and temperature (T ).
    Incorporating water and steam properties into our mass and energy
    balance completes the governing equations. In doing so, the dependent
    terms in the governing equations become directly relatable to phenomena
    desired in the final model — those essential in PWR LOCA simulation.
    In the 1960s, water and steam property data were fairly well characterized
    for the ranges of pressures and temperatures required in nuclear power
    systems (P < 2,500 psia/17 MPa and T < 620◦ F/325◦ C). In fact, the 1967
    ASME standard [Meyer et al., 1967] is still commonly used in nuclear safety
    analysis while new standards regularly appear every ten years or so. As such,
    relations among intensive properties were readily available to translate the
    basic fluid model into its final form.
    The first state relation applied is the relationship between temperature
    and enthalpy (h). Outside of phasic transitions (e.g., liquid to steam),

    106                          DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    changes in enthalpy are directly proportional to temperature via the fluid’s
    specific heat (c p ). As will be evident through the model closure process,
    while temperature is directly measurable, enthalpy is a better measure
    of thermal load as it impacts energy storage and release dynamics in
    the fluid.
    To translate the expression for specific volume and internal energy
    to pressure and enthalpy, specific volume and internal energy are defined
    using their partial derivatives (state relations) with respect to pressure and
    enthalpy:
                                   
    ∂v                       ∂v
    dv =                    dP +                     dh,                 (4.34)
    ∂P       h               ∂h       P
                                   
    ∂e                       ∂e
    de =                    dP +                     dh.                 (4.35)
    ∂P       h               ∂h       P


    Substituting the above into Equations (4.31) and (4.33), respectively,
    completes the derivation of a mathematical model relating dynamic change
    in a nuclear power reactor coolant system (or any thermodynamic system)
    in terms of pressure and enthalpy:
                                   
    ∂v        dP             ∂v         dh
    M                     +M                       = −v(ṁ in − ṁ out ),             (4.36)
    ∂P       h dt            ∂h       P dt
                                   
    ∂e        dP             ∂e         dh
    M                     +M
    ∂P       h dt            ∂h       P dt

    = ṁ in (h o,in − e) − ṁ out (h o,out − e) + Q̇ net .                        (4.37)

    The last step is to calculate the partial derivatives. When the
    fluid is single-phase, the property partial derivatives in the coefficient
    matrix could be approximated by solutions for incompressible fluid (i.e.,
    subcooled liquid) or ideal gas (i.e., superheated steam); however, given the
    availability of data, these are best determined from fluid property tables
    with the derivatives evaluated numerically using property finite difference
    approximations. When the mixture becomes saturated, another step is
    required and that is to evaluate the equilibrium quality (xeq ), which is

    Analytical Requirements and Software                           107


    defined as:
    h −hf
    xeq =          .                               (4.38)
    h fg
    The saturated mixture specific volume can then be written in terms of
    the pressure (through the saturation properties) and the mixture enthalpy:
    v fg
    v = vf +           (h − h f ).                       (4.39)
    h fg
    Differentiating the above relation gives the partial derivatives of the
    saturated mixture specific volume as a function of the partial derivatives
    of the saturation properties:
     
    ∂v         v fg
    =       ,                     (4.40)
    ∂h P       h fg
                                        
    ∂v        ∂v f       ∂v f g     v fg    ∂h f       ∂h f g
    =       + xeq        −                + xeq        . (4.41)
    ∂P h      ∂P          ∂P        h fg    ∂P          ∂P
    For the internal energy partial derivatives, the thermodynamic
    relationship is used e = h − Pv. Substituting this into Equation 4.39,
    solving for the internal energy and differentiating gives the following partial
    derivatives:
     
    ∂e              Pv f g
    =1−           ,                    (4.42)
    ∂h P             h fg
                                           
    ∂e           ∂v f       ∂v f g     v fg      ∂h f       ∂h f g
    =−        − xeq        +                  + xeq        . (4.43)
    ∂P h         ∂P          ∂P        h fg       ∂P         ∂P
    While the partials with respect to pressure can be directly computed
    from the steam table data, the partials with respect to enthalpy must be
    evaluated numerically, as mentioned for a single-phase fluid.
    To solve this, the developers of FLASH applied a standard linear, state-
    space model. The form of the solution has the two governing equations put
    into matrix form using the state variable vector, u = [P; h]. The matrix
    form for the governing equations is:
    du
    A      = b,                                  (4.44)
    dt

    108                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    where the coefficient matrix and source vector are given as:
    ⎡   ⎤
    ∂e    ∂e
    ⎢ ∂P     ∂h P ⎥
    ⎢      h      ⎥
    A = M ⎢       ⎥,                                         (4.45)
    ⎣ ∂v     ∂v ⎦
    ∂P h  ∂h P
                                                          
    ṁ in (h o,in −e) − ṁ out (h o,out −e) + Q̇ net
    b=                                                               .       (4.46)
    −v(ṁ in − ṁ out )

    A simple Forward Euler time integrator was then used to advance the
    solution of the set of equations through time.

    4.6.2 FLASH metamodel model closure
    The derived governing equations describe the reasoned formulation of
    physical laws for a simple control volume with mass and energy exchange
    with its environment. While arguably elegant in its generality, it is useless
    without context. This context addresses all the practical elements of the
    selection of governing equations, the set of constitutive relations and the
    numerical solution. In the following, the constitutive relations presented
    generally align with those appearing in the original FLASH code. Specific
    constitutive relations have been replaced in this “FLASH metamodel”
    where a preferred substitution of equivalent or greater complexity is
    available.

    4.6.2.1 Water property partial derivatives
    When the mixture is sub-cooled, the property partial derivatives in the
    coefficient matrix are determined using finite difference approximations.
    However, when the mixture becomes saturated, the equilibrium quality
    is needed to determine the mixture properties. The equilibrium quality is
    defined as:

    h −hf
    xeq =          .                                   (4.47)
    h fg

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          109


    The saturated mixture specific volume can then be written in terms
    of the pressure (through the saturation properties) and the mixture
    enthalpy:
    v fg
    v = vf +          (h − h f ).                       (4.48)
    h fg
    Differentiating the above relation gives the partial derivatives of the
    saturated mixture specific volume as a function of the partial derivatives of
    the saturation properties:
     
    ∂v         v fg
    =       ,                      (4.49)
    ∂h P       h fg
                                         
    ∂v        ∂v f       ∂v f g     v fg    ∂h f       ∂h f g
    =       + xeq        −                + xeq        . (4.50)
    ∂P h       ∂P          ∂P        h fg    ∂P          ∂P
    For the internal energy partial derivatives, the thermodynamic relation-
    ship was used:

    e = h − Pdv.                                  (4.51)

    Solving for the internal energy and differentiating gives the following
    partial derivatives:
     
    ∂e              Pv f g
    =1−           ,                   (4.52)
    ∂h P              h fg
                                            
    ∂e           ∂v f       ∂v f g     v fg      ∂h f       ∂h f g
    =−         − xeq        +                  + xeq        . (4.53)
    ∂P h         ∂P          ∂P        h fg      ∂P          ∂P


    4.6.2.2 Momentum characteristics
    While modern thermal-hydraulic models include momentum among the
    governing equations, that was not so in FLASH. Since model momentum
    was only used to establish rates of mass and energy moving across a
    dimensionless control volume boundary, its application is better described
    as a constitutive relation — specifically, a relation for mass flow either into
    or out of the control volume.

    110                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Central to the phenomenological description is the form of the
    momentum equation, which in most general terms (and assuming HEM)
    appears as
    
    time rate of change
    = [Pressure] + [Work] + [Body]
    momentum
    + [Friction] + [Form Loss] + [Acceleration].
    (4.54)

    The primary quantity desired from a hydraulic analysis is the
    differential pressure between adjoining control volumes or across an
    interface between a control volume and its environment. In this lump
    parameter representation, friction and the rate of change of momentum
    are not meaningful. As such, the momentum equation becomes a form of
    the Bernoulli equation, a mechanical energy balance:
            2                          
    1               ṁ                       1     ṁ 2
    P = ρ K                      + ρg(z + H ) + ρ        ,               (4.55)
    2               ρA                       2     ρA

    where K is an empirical form loss coefficient, ρ is the fluid density, g is
    the gravitation constant, z is the elevation change, H is the work addition
    such as that from a pump, and P is the corresponding pressure drop.
    Because for model closure, mass flow is the desired quantity, thus the fluid
    velocity appears as the ratio of the mass flow rate and the product of density
    and area.
    Generally, the dependent parameters will be known based on the initial
    state of the problem. Unrecoverable pressure losses resulting from form are
    commonly treated empirically (i.e., user-defined) in large-scale simulation.
    For certain configurations, such as for an abrupt area change, formulas are
    available.

    4.6.2.3 Subcooled critical flow (m out )
    The subcooled critical flow model used in FLASH was very simple; it was
    little more than an extension of the mechanical energy expression in the
    previous equation, modified by a calibration factor. In lieu of rehashing that

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          111


    method, an alternative model for subcooled critical flow of the same vintage
    as that used in FLASH is presented here. This is the Fauske’s equilibrium
    rate model (ERM) [Henry and Fauske, 1971]. The key difference in the
    ERM is the “ERM mass flux” term, which is defined as
    
    h fg           1
    G ERM =                      ,                       (4.56)
    v fg         NTc p f

    where G ERM = mass flux (kg/s/m2 ), h f g = vaporization enthalpy (J/kg),
    v f g = change in specific volume (m3 /kg), T = absolute temperature (K ),
    and c f = specific heat of the liquid (J/kg-K). N is a non-dimensional
    correction parameter to account for non-equilibrium or other effects (i.e., a
    calibration term). To account for the subcooling, an additional single-phase
    pressure drop term is included, giving the critical flow rate to be:
    
    ∼
    G cr = C D 2[P − Psat (T )]ρ f + G 2ERM .                      (4.57)

    In the above expression, T is the system temperature that is determined
    using the property look-up table for the current system pressure and mixture
    enthalpy. Thus, Psat (T ) is the saturation pressure for the current lumped
    system pressure. A strong argument for the “right” value for N is the value
    that provides continuity with the two-phase flow model; however, resolving
    N is just a calibration exercise, which is dependent on the application and
    data available.

    4.6.2.4 Two-phase critical flow (m out )
    The equilibrium two-phase critical flow models relate the velocity (u) at the
    choked location to the thermodynamic enthalpy of the fluid at the upstream
    point of entry into a pipe or orifice. The basic expression for mass flux
    can be rearranged in terms of enthalpy by pulling density out of the square
    root radical. Consequently, the common equilibrium models express critical
    mass flux as:
    
    G cr = Cd ρ  2(h 0 − xh g − (1 − x)h f ),                    (4.58)

    112                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    where a discharge coefficient, Cd , is included to calibrate for non-
    equilibrium effects. In addition, h f and h g are liquid and vapor specific
    enthalpy at critical pressure, x is equilibrium quality and ρ  is a mixture
    density expressed by:

    1
    ρ  =                                  ,               (4.59)
    x
    ρg
    + (1−x)S
    ρf
    x + 1−x
    S2


    where S is the slip, i.e., the ratio of phasic velocities (u g /u f ) and ρ f and ρg
    are liquid and vapor density, respectively. Since the choke plane properties
    are unknowable in FLASH’s simple fluid model, an iterative search must be
    made to find the maximum mass flux, with respect to changes in pressure
    at the choked location, that is:
                           2 
    δG                     δ G 
    =  0  and               < 0.                 (4.60)
    δ P s                   δ P 2 s

    Several equilibrium two-phase critical flow models can be derived
    from this basic approach. Individual models are distinguished based on
    assumptions for describing the slip. FLASH assumed the Moody model
    [Moody, 1975] where:
            1/3
    ρf
    S=                   .                         (4.61)
    ρg

    This result is based on an assumption that the mass flux is maximized
    with respect to the slip ratio. The homogeneous equilibrium model (HEM)
    and Fauske’s model [Henry and Fauske, 1971] are the common alternatives.
    The HEM assumes no slip (S = 1) and the Fauske model is based on
    maximizing mass flux with respect to the slip ratio. This is:
            1/2
    ρf
    S=                   .                         (4.62)
    ρg

    4.6.2.5 Boiloff (m out )
    For long-term cooling after a LOCA, coolant boiloff is important. Basically,
    it is just ṁ = Q̇ net / h f g ; however, it is inherent in the FLASH metamodel

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          113


    model. As energy is added to the system, energy storage translates into a
    pressure increase. If there is a leak path, then from the mechanical energy
    equation above, the expression for mass flow is:
           
    ρg    ṁ 2
    = (Pvessel − Pexit ) or
    2 ρg A
    
    ṁ = AG = A 2ρg (Pvessel − Pexit ).               (4.63)

    4.6.2.6 Break plane conditions (h o,out )
    In order to solve the energy balance in control volumes, the correct enthalpy
    must be assigned to all incoming and exiting flows. This requires a model for
    segregating the conditions of the control volume adjacent to the break and
    that of the bulk. The point-in-time when the break plane transitions from
    two-phase to vapor-only is modeled to occur when the adjacent volume
    has completely voided. The original FLASH code estimated a froth level
    and matched that with the elevation of adjacent flow paths to calculate a
    quality. To emulate this function for the target benchmark case of a top-sided
    leak adjacent to a control volume, a “critical transition mixture mass ratio”
    is evaluated that is defined as the ratio of the initial vessel mass to the
    remaining system mass at the time when “the control volume adjacent to
    the break” has emptied. While this departs from the FLASH approach, it
    does align with the RELAP5-3D’s method of applying upstream-donoring
    of void fraction; that is, it projects the volume void fraction to the
    junction in the direction of flow. As such, the break plane void fraction is
    defined as:
    Mtot − Mcr
    αf =               ,                              (4.64)
    1 − Mcr
    where α f is the break liquid fraction, Mtot is the total vessel mass normalized
    and Mcr is the critical transition mixture mass ratio. A useful value for this
    ratio drawn from the work of [D’Auria and Frogheri, 2002] is 40%. Since
    α f + αg = 1, the break void fraction is simply:

    αg = 1 − α f .                                 (4.65)

    Void and liquid fraction are used in the calculation of break enthalpy
    by their relationship to equilibrium quality (note for homogeneous flow

    114                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    assumption, velocity terms cancel):

    αg ρ g u g
    x=                             ,                       (4.66)
    αg ρ g u g + α f ρ f u f
    h 0 = h f + xh f g .                              (4.67)

    4.6.2.7 Reactor power (Q net )
    The reactor power model in FLASH is a full implementation of a six-group
    point reactor kinetics model, such as that described in [Lamarsh and
    Baratta, 2001]. The reactor power model for the FLASH metamodel is
    further simplified by assuming coincident shutdown with the beginning
    of the simulation. Consequently, the necessary components of reactor
    power are shutdown reactivity, decay heat and actinide power. Fission
    power is obtained by solving the neutron kinetic equations after a large
    negative insertion of reactivity. The simplest representation of this assumes
    a single group of delayed neutrons (the six-group representation is more
    commonly applied); the power is given by (see [Todreas and Kazimi, 1993,
    Equations (3-65)], translated to power from neutron flux):

    1
    P f (t) = Po                ,                           (4.68)
    βeff / 1 − ρ

    where ρ is reactivity in dollars ($), i.e., normalized by βeff .
    The 1979 ANS standard for decay power [American Nuclear Society,
    1979] can be implemented by advancing the differential equation:

    d            Fγ aαj
    γαj (t) =        Fα ψ(t) − λαj γαj (t)
    dt            λαj
    j = 1, 2, . . . , Nα α = 1, 2, 3                     (4.69)
    
    3 
    Nα
    Pγ (t) = G(t)                λαj γαj (t),
    α=1 j =1


    where:
    γ = Fission product yield for either 235 U, 238 U, or 239 Pu
    a = Normalized parameter fitted to decay power data

    Analytical Requirements and Software                                       115


    λ = Normalized parameter fitted to decay power data (similar to a
    fission product decay constant)
    Fα = Fraction of fissions from isotope α
    Fγ = User input factor for adding conservatism to a calculation
    Nα = Total number of energy groups (=23)
    G(t) = Neutron absorption correction factor
    Actinide decay power is evaluated as a function of time (t), duration of
    operation (T ) and fissions-per-capture (R) as arguments. The formulas are:

    4.91 × 10−4
    PNp239 = 0.419R
    4.91 × 10−4 − 3.41 × 10−6
    −6 T                   −6 t )
    · (1 − e(−3.41×10          ))e(−3.41×10
    (4.70)
    3.41 × 10−6
    −
    4.91 × 10−4 − 3.41 × 10−6
    −4 T )                 −4 t )
    · (1 − e(−4.91×10            )e(−4.91×10            ,
    −4 T )                  −4 t )
    PU235 = 0.474R(1 − e(−4.91×10                 )e(−4.91×10              .       (4.71)

    Dependent model parameters in Equations (4.69) to (4.71) are specified in
    [American Nuclear Society, 1979].

    4.6.2.8 Accumulator injection (m in )
    In 1966, accumulators had yet to become a standard safety feature of
    a PWR ECCS, but some form of pumped injection was provided for
    long-term cooling. Safety analysis using FLASH, therefore, only required
    the capability for simulating a simple pumped injection ECCS and no
    explicit model for an accumulator. That would not come about until the
    introduction of RELAP5/MOD0 in 1979. The pumped safety injection in
    FLASH, referred to as a Fill System, only required table entries of pump
    head and flow. Theoretically, an accumulator model could be constructed
    that could emulate accumulator performance.
    The importance of the accumulator performance is well established.
    As such, instead of using a table, which would otherwise require an offline
    analysis of the fluid behavior, the RELAP5-3D model [U.S. Department
    of Energy, 2015] was implemented with some simplifications. Since the

    116                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    hydraulic solution in that model uses pressure, temperature and velocity as
    independent variables, it is conveniently formed for implementation in the
    FLASH metamodel. Pressure and velocity appear together in the mechanical
    energy equation, solving for velocity gives:

    vexit = [2(Pacc − Pexit + ρacc gL liq )/ρacc ]1/2 .                   (4.72)

    The gravity head term is found by tracking the liquid level in the
    accumulator. The accumulator liquid level is found from:
    Vliq
    L acc =        ,                                   (4.73)
    Aacc
    where:
     t
    Vliq (t) = Vliq,0 −          Ẇliq dt.                       (4.74)
    0

    The FLASH metamodel only solves for vexit when (Pacc − Pexit +
    ρacc gL liq ) > 0. For the complete solution of accumulator conditions,
    volumetric flow rate is preferred to velocity since it relates directly to the
    change in the accumulator gas volume.

    Ẇgas = −Ẇliq = Aacc vexit .                              (4.75)

    The accumulator energy equation is cast in terms of the gas temperature,
    Tg and volume, Vd ,
    dTg         d Vd
    Mcv       = −Pacc      + Q̇ D ,                               (4.76)
    dt           dt
    where M is the nitrogen mass, cv is nitrogen specific heat and Q̇ D is the
    net heat transfer rate to the gas from all sources. Differentiating the ideal
    gas law (i.e., d(P V ) = RdT ) provides a relationship between the time
    derivative for pressure and the time derivative of temperature. Substituting
    into the above gives:
             
    R d Vd         d P acc   R
    Pacc 1 +             + VD          = Q̇ D ,            (4.77)
    cv dt            dt      cv
    where R is the ideal gas constant. Since the liquid is incompressible, the
    change in dome volume term is equivalent to the volumetric flow rate at the

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          117


    exit, A L v L . The pressure equation becomes:
            
    R                 d Pacc  R
    Pacc 1 +        A L v L + VD        = Q̇ D .                    (4.78)
    cv                  dt    cv
    The expression for the FLASH metamodel is straightforward by recognizing
    that this has the general form and solution of:
    dP
    = −a P + b,                                 (4.79)
    dt
    b
    P(t) = Ce−at + ,                                 (4.80)
    a
    where t is the timestep,
    
    1 + cRv Ẇgas         R Q̇ D
    a=                 and b =        .                             (4.81)
    VD                cv VD
    R                     cp
    Since    = k − 1 where k =     = 1.4, then                           (4.82)
    cv                    cv
    1.4Ẇgas         0.4 Q̇ D
    a=             and b =          .                         (4.83)
    VD               VD
    The solution for b requires an expression for the rate of energy input into the
    gas space, Q̇ D , which is from heat convection from the accumulator walls,
    ceiling and liquid surface (i.e., Q̇ D = h AT ). As such, it is primarily
    dependent on the temperature difference between the wall and the gas.
    The heat transfer coefficients have the form (see Equations (3.5-153) and
    (3.5-155) in [U.S. Department of Energy, 2015]).
    C i kn        1
    hi =          (GrPr) 3 ,                          (4.84)
    δ
    where Ci is a constant dependent on geometry type and defined in [U.S.
    Department of Energy, 2015], kn is the thermal conductivity, δ is vessel
    diameter, and Gr and Pr are the Grashof and Prandlt numbers. This
    accumulator heat transfer model does require nitrogen properties. For the
    target benchmark problem, all nitrogen properties with the exception of
    kinematic viscosity (appears in Gr) were treated as a constant determined
    from the initial pressure and temperature.

    118                      DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Surface areas for two vessel surface types were considered: (1) hori-
    zontal surfaces and (2) vertical walls. The area of the horizontal surfaces
    is just Aacc,h = 2 ∗ π Dacc
    2
    /4 (two-times for both the liquid surface and the
    ceiling). The area of the vertical walls is:

    Aacc,v = π Dacc L D ,                                              (4.85)
    VD
    LD =               ,                                             (4.86)
    Aacc,h
    4 Aacc             0.5                               0.5
    VD                      VD                                     π
    Aacc,v = π Dacc        = π Dacc π           =2                                               VD . (4.87)
    Aacc,h          Dacc Aacc,h                                    Aacc

    Since kinematic viscosity is a strong function of pressure, a simple
    correlation was derived from property table data,

    ν = 1.29/P 0.991 m 2 /s, where pressure is given in Pa                                        (4.88)

    With the dependent parameters defined from initial conditions, [U.S.
    Department of Energy, 2015], and above, the final FLASH metamodel rate
    of energy equation is
    !                             0.5       "
    π
    Q̇ D = h 1.333 Aacc +                          VD (Tw − Tg ),                         (4.89)
    Aacc

    where
                                                                 13
    P 0.99
    h = 0.15 ∗ 0.029 9.8 ∗ 0.73 ∗ 0.0033|Tw − Tg |                                             , (4.90)
    1.26

    and the gas temperature is calculated from that appearing as Equation (3.5-
    207) in [U.S. Department of Energy, 2015],
                n
    
    R     VD         R Q̇ nD
    Cv ln V n+1 +t Cv P n V n
    Tgn+1 = Tgn e              D                  D       .                       (4.91)

    The wall temperature is initialized to the initial gas temperature and
    assumed not to change for the duration of simulations.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                               119


    4.6.2.9 Pumped injection
    A pump contribution is just another term in the momentum balance of
    Equation (4.54) in Section 4.6.2.2. The original FLASH code did not
    have a pump model and coolant pumps are typically assumed unavailable
    in LOCA analyses unless they contribute an adverse impact. For most
    thermal-hydraulic system analysis codes, the pump model originates from
    Farman and Anderson [1973], prepared for RELAP3. The basic parameters
    that characterize a pump are the rotational speed, ω, the volumetric flow, Q,
    the head rise, H and the shaft torque, τ . In Farman and Anderson’s model,
    eight homologous/similarity curves express pump performance relating
    head and torque data with flow and pump speed. Specifically, each of the
    basic parameters is normalized with respect to a known or “rated” operating
    condition. These are simply

    H     τ                 ω     Q
    h=       β=             α=       v=    .                          (4.92)
    Hr    τr                ωr    Qr

    The pump performance relationships represented by the eight curves
    appear as pump head ratios (i.e., either h/v 2 or h/α 2 ) versus ratios of flows
    and speeds (i.e., v/α or α/v). This is illustrated in Figure 4.7.
    For a steady-state (i.e., powered) pump, the head is controlled by the
    resistive forces throughout the loop, that is:
           2
    1       1                         Q
    Ppump = ρg H = Rρu 2 = Rρ                                ,           (4.93)
    2       2                         A

    where ρ is the fluid density, H is the pump head (as displacement), g is the
    acceleration of gravity, u is velocity, Q is volumetric flow, A is flow area
    and R is a constant that captures the accumulated effects of loop resistances
    (i.e., “fL/D” friction and form losses). With the substitution of volumetric
    flow for velocity and accumulating the proportionality constant (i.e., control
    volume area squared) into the resistance constant, an explicit relationship
    between the pump head and volumetric flow is evident as a function of
    loop resistance. By normalizing per Equation (4.92), normalizing the loop
    resistance (R ∗ = R/Rr ) and consolidating the independent variables, an
    expression is found for one of the dependent variables in the homologous

    120                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 4.7. Example of homologous pump head curves.


    head curve (i.e., h/v 2 = 1/2R ∗ ). With the known pump speed, head
    and resistance, torque and volumetric flow can be determined using the
    homologous curves and relationships. From the ratios of flows and speeds
    (i.e., v/α or α/v), pump motor torque is evaluated, which is equivalent
    to the negative of hydraulic torque. The hydraulic/motor torque must be
    scaled by the ratio of the actual fluid density to the rated fluid density.
    That is,
     
    ρm
    τhy = τho        ,                       (4.94)
    ρR

    where τho is the homologous torque, ρm is the fluid mixture density and ρ R
    is the rated fluid density. The total pump torque includes the contribution of
    empirically derived pump frictional torque (τ f r ), which is directly added to
    the hydraulic torque (τhy ) as:

    τ = τhy + τ f r .                              (4.95)

    When pump power is lost, the total pump torque is used to calculate
    the pump speed (ω). The pump speed is calculated by the deceleration

    Analytical Requirements and Software                          121


    equation:
    dω
    I      = τ,                                 (4.96)
    dt
    where I is the shaft moment of inertia. Numerically, the steady-state solution
    of Equations 4.92 to 4.96 is applied for subsequently evaluating pump head,
    volumetric flow and hydraulic torque. The rate of energy addition to the
    pump system is given by the product of torque and pump speed (τ ω). The
    total pump power added to the fluid by the pump is separated into a hydraulic
    term and a dissipation term. Physically, the dissipation term arises from
    turbulence in the pump and is added explicitly to the pump volume as heat.
    The ratio of the hydraulic work term to the total power is the pump efficiency.
    In a closed system, the hydraulic head from the pump is balanced by the
    sum of wall friction losses and form losses in the momentum equation.
    These losses should also appear as energy source terms in the energy
    equation.
    In two-phase flow conditions, pump performance degrades. The com-
    mon degradation model involves defining two-phase pump difference
    curves. The single-to-two phase head and torque differences are multiplied
    by a function (M H and Mτ below) of void fraction (and, optionally,
    pressure). The result is simply added to the single-phase head.

    H = H1φ − M H (H1φ − H2φ ) and τ = τ1φ − Mτ (τ1φ − τ2φ ). (4.97)

    4.7 Conclusion
    The two-phase fluid model of thermal-hydraulic system codes may be
    described with various degrees of complexity. Regardless, the full set of
    governing and constitutive equations, whether appearing in a mechanistic
    form or with simplification, represents an optimization of first principles
    science and empiricism against solution accuracy, completeness and exe-
    cution throughput. Empiricism and simplification aside, this experiential
    optimization is “best-estimate”. Rather than providing precise predictions
    of outcomes, best-estimate outcomes inherent bias and uncertainties that
    must be addressed objectively through verification and validation, scaling
    and uncertainty quantification, which are the subject of Chapters 5, 6 and 7,
    respectively.

    122                      DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    References
    American Nuclear Society (1979). Decay heat power in light water reactors, ANSI/ANS-
    5.1-1979.
    Aumiller, D. L., Tomlinson, E. T. and Bauer, R. C. (2001). A coupled RELAP5-
    3D/CFD methodology with a proof-of-principle calculation, Nucl. Eng. Des., Vol. 205,
    pp. 83–90.
    Aumiller, D. L., Tomlinson, E. T. and Weaver, W. L. (2002). An integrated RELAP5-3D
    and multiphase CFD code system utilizing a semi-implicit coupling technique, Nucl.
    Eng. Des., Vol. 216, pp. 77–87.
    Aumiller, D. L., Swartele, G. W., Meholic, M. J., Lloyd, L. J. and Buschman, F. X. (2015).
    COBRA-IE: A new sub-channel analysis code, 16th Int. Topl. Mtg. Nuclear Reactor
    Thermal Hydraulics, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
    Aumiller, D. L., Buschman, F. X., Tomlinson, E. T. and Gill, D. (2016). Development
    of an integrated code system using R5EXEC and RELAP5-3D, Nucl. Tech., 193(1),
    pp. 183–199.
    Bestion, D. (2008). System code models and capabilities, Seminar on the Transfer of
    Competence, Knowledge and Experience Gained through CSNI Activities in the Field
    of Thermal-Hydraulics, THICKET-2008, University of Pisa, Italy.
    Burell, M. J., Enix, D., Lerchel, E., Miro, J., Teschendorff, V. and Wolfert, K. (1989). The
    thermal-hydraulic code ATHLET for analysis of PWR and BWR systems, 4th Int. Topl.
    Mtg. Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics, NURETH-4 (Karlsruhe, Germany), Vol. 2,
    pp. 1234–1239.
    Collier, J. G. (1981). Convective Boiling and Condensation, 2nd Ed. (McGraw-Hill Book
    Company, London).
    D’Auria, F. and Frogheri, M. (2002). Use of natural circulation map for assessing PWR
    performance, Nucl. Eng. Des., 215, pp. 111–126.
    Farman, R. F. and Anderson, N. R. (1973). A pump model for loss-of-coolant accident
    analysis, Topl. Mtg. Water Reactor Safety, CONF-730304, pp. 569–580.
    Gauntt, R. O., Cash, J. E., Cole, R. K., Erikson, C. M., Humphries, L. L., Rodriguez, S. B. and
    Young, M. F. (2005). MELCOR computer code manuals, Vol. 2: Reference manuals,
    version 1.8.6 (Vol. 2, Rev. 3), NUREG/CR-6119, SAND2005-5713, Sandia National
    Laboratory.
    Geffraye, G., Antoni, O., Farvacque, M., Kadri, D., Lavialle, G., Rameau, B. and Ruby, A.
    (2011). CATHARE 2 V2.5 2: A single version for various applications, Nucl. Eng.
    Des., Vol. 241, pp. 4456–4463.
    Henry, R. E. and Fauske, H. K. (1971). The two-phase critical flow of one-
    component mixtures in nozzles, orifices, and short tubes, J. Heat Transfer, 93(2),
    pp. 179–187.
    Hubbard, M. B. and Dukler, A. E. (1966). The characterization of flow regimes for horizontal
    two-phase flow, Proc. 1966 Heat Trans. Fluid Mech. Inst., University of Santa Clara,
    California, USA.
    Ishii, M. (1975). Thermo-fluid dynamic theory of two-phase flow, Collection de la direction
    des etudes et recherches d’electricite de France, Eyrolles, Paris, France, No. 22.
    Ishii, M. and Chawla, T. C. (1979). Local drag laws in dispersed two-phase flow,
    NUREG/CR-1230, ANL-79-105, Argonne National Laboratory.

    Analytical Requirements and Software                             123


    Ishii, M. and Mishima, K. (1980). Study of two-fluid model and interfacial area,
    NUREG/CR-1873, ANL-80-111, Argonne National Laboratory.
    Ishii, M. and De Jarlais, G. (1982). Inverted annular flow modeling, Advanced Code Review
    Group Meeting, Idaho Falls, Idaho, USA.
    Lamarsh, J. R. and Baratta, A. J. (2001). Introduction to Nuclear Engineering, 3rd Ed.
    (Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, USA).
    Liles, D. R. and Reed, W. H. (1978). A semi-implicit method for two-phase fluid dynamic,
    J. Comp. Phys., Vol. 26, pp. 390–407.
    Mahaffy, J. H. (1982). A stability-enhancing two-step method for fluid flow calculations,
    J. Comp. Phys., Vol. 46, pp. 329–341.
    Mandhane, J. M., Gregory, G. A. and Aziz, K. (1974). A flow pattern map for gas-liquid
    flow in horizontal pipes, Int. J. Multiphase Flow, Vol. 1, pp. 537–553.
    Margolis, S. G. and Redfield, J. E. (1966). FLASH — A program for digital simulation of
    the loss of coolant accident, WAPD-TM-534, Westinghouse Electric Corporation.
    Martin, R. P. (1995). RELAP5/MOD3 code coupling model, Nucl. Saf., 36(2), pp. 290–299.
    Meyer, C. A., McClintock, R. B., Silvestri, G. J. and Spencer, Jr., R. C. (1967). ASME
    Steam Tables — Thermodynamic and Transport Properties of Steam Comprising
    Tables and Charts for Steam and Water (American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
    New York, USA).
    Moody, F. J. (1975). Maximum discharge rate of liquid-vapor mixtures from vessels,
    NEDO-21052, General Electric.
    Ransom, V. H. and Hicks, D. L. (1984). Hyperbolic two-pressure models for two-phase
    flow, J. Comp. Phys., Vol. 53, pp. 124–151.
    Ransom, V. H. (1989). Course A — Numerical modeling of two-phase flows for presen-
    tation at Ecole d’Ete d’Analysis Numerique, EGG-EAST-8546, Idaho National
    Engineering Laboratory.
    Rohatgi, U. S., Cheng, H. S., Khan, H. J. and Neymotin, L. Y. (1996). RAMONA-4B:
    A computer code with three-dimensional neutron kinetics for BWR and SBWR system
    transients, BNL-NUREG-63265, Brookhaven National Laboratory.
    Stewart, H. B. and Wendroff, B. (1984). Two-phase flow: Models and methods, J. Comp.
    Phys., Vol. 56, pp. 363–409.
    Taitel, Y. and Dukler, A. E. (1976). A model of predicting flow regime transitions
    in horizontal and near horizontal gas-liquid flow, AIChE Journal, Vol. 22,
    pp. 47–55.
    Taitel, Y., Bornea, D. and Dukler, A. E. (1980). Modeling flow pattern transitions for steady
    upward gas-liquid flow in vertical tubes, AIChE Journal, Vol. 26, pp. 345–354.
    Todreas, N. E. and Kazimi, M. S. (1993). Nuclear Systems I: Thermal Hydraulic
    Fundamentals, 2nd Ed. (Taylor & Francis, Levittown, New York, USA).
    U.S. Department of Energy (2015). RELAP5-3D code manual volume I: Code structure,
    system models and solution methods, Version 4.3, INL/MIS-15-36723, Idaho National
    Laboratory.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2005). Transient and accident analysis methods,
    Regulatory Guide 1.203.
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (2008). TRACE V5.0, theory manuals — Volume 1:
    Field equations, solution methods, and physical models.
    Wallis. G. B. (1969). One-Dimensional Two-Phase Flow, 2nd Ed. (McGraw Hill, New York).

    124                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Weaver, W. L. (2005). The application programming interface for the PVMEXEC
    program and associated code coupling system, INL/EXT-05-00107, Idaho National
    Engineering & Environmental Laboratory.
    Weaver, W. L., Tomlinson, E. T. and Aumiller, D. L. (2002). A generic semi-implicit coup-
    ling methodology for use in RELAP5-3D, Nucl. Eng. Des., Vol. 211, pp. 13–26.
    Wilson, G. E. and Boyack, B. E. (1998). The role of the PIRT process in experiments, code
    development and code applications associated with reactor safety analysis, Nucl. Eng.
    Des., 186(23), pp. 23–37.
    Wulff, W. (2011). Critical review of conservation equations for two-phase flow in the U.S.
    NRC TRACE code, Nucl. Eng. Des., 241(10), pp. 4237–4260.
    Zuber, N, Staub, F. W., Bijwaard, G. and Kroeger, P. G. (1967). Steady-state and transient
    void fraction in two-phase flow systems, GEAP 5417, General Electric.
    Zuber, N. and Findlay, J. (1965). Average volumetric concentration in two-phase systems,
    J. Heat Transfer, Vol. 87, pp. 453–468.

=== Chapter 7 — Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods (R.P. Martin, A. Petruzzi, C. Frepoli) ===
7.1 Evaluation Model Reprise
    The evaluation model concept was introduced in Chapter 1a and further
    developed in the subsequent chapters. While the evaluation model may
    cosmetically appear to resemble a procedure for how to perform an analysis,
    it is the embodiment of a verified method defined by a large body of work
    associated with experience, testing, modeling, simulation and associated
    quality assurance. As such, it addresses the many facets of uncertainty
    associated with the acceptability of a nuclear power plant’s critical safety
    functions, including knowledge and expertise, data applicability, code and
    model development, code verification and validation, quantification of
    process and phenomenological uncertainties, and human reliability and the
    consequence of failure. Development of the evaluation model starts from the
    definition of the objectives, the functional and infrastructural requirements,
    and the identification of important phenomena. Guided by these top-level
    priorities, modeling and simulation features are then developed and assessed
    for completeness, consistency and accuracy.
    A plant-specific safety analysis is customized by how its unique plant
    characterization is translated into model parameters native to the simulation
    computer code selected for the evaluation model (i.e., “computer code
    input”). Among these, the plant’s physical constituents (e.g., water, steel,
    concrete, etc.) and geometry may be the most self-evident examples. In
    addition, a plant’s unique characterization relates to operations mechanics
    and constraints, as compiled in the plant’s technical specifications and
    limiting conditions for operation that define the plant’s licensing basis.
    Collectively, the essential modeling specifications for safety analysis are

    a In the United States, the evaluation model development and application process (EMDAP) is described
    in [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2005a]. It represents the compilation of best-practices that
    have evolved beginning with the earliest nuclear safety analysis computer code FLASH [Margolis and
    Redfield, 1966] to the development of deterministic evaluation models in the 1970s, the expansion of
    the nuclear safety database through experimentation of the 1980s and beyond, and the development
    and application of best-estimate evaluation models in the 1990s and early 2000s. The OECD/NEA
    Committee on the Safety of Nuclear Installations and the IAEA have published similar guidance that
    capture these best-practices derived from international experience [Nuclear Energy Agency, 2013;
    International Atomic Energy Agency, 2008].

    268                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    identified based on the following criteria (from the U.S. Code of Federal
    Regulations 10 CFR 50.36):

    • Installed instrumentation that is used in the control room to detect
    and indicate, a significant abnormal degradation of the reactor coolant
    pressure boundary.
    • A process variable, design feature, or operating restriction that is an initial
    condition of a design basis accident or transient analysis.
    • A structure, system, or component that is part of the primary success
    path and which functions or actuates to mitigate a design basis accident
    or transient.
    • A structure, system, or component which operating experience or
    probabilistic risk assessment has shown to be significant to public health
    and safety.

    For either deterministic or best-estimate evaluation models, the
    compilation of this information appears as a set of parameters that can be
    viewed in an abstract sense as the mathematical model, including tolerances
    and uncertainties. The principal nuclear power plant’s characteristics whose
    parameters influence its phenomenological and processes behavior relevant
    to safety analysis are:

    • Geometrical specifications (e.g., HX area, piping diameter, length) —
    Parameters describing the physical displacement of a structure, system
    or component.
    • Material properties (e.g., thermal conductivity, heat capacity, porosity
    as well as thermomechanical features) — Parameters describing the
    physical composition of a structure, system or component.
    • Process parameters (e.g., flow rate, temperature, power, pressure, heat
    flux, energy sources) — Parameters describing the nominal performance
    of a structure, system or component.
    • Design parameters (e.g., failure loads) — Parameters describing the
    limiting performance of a structure, system or component.
    • Control logic, trips or set points, operator actions, etc.

    Many of these parameters appear in the actual computational
    description of the phenomena and process that are enclosed by the above list

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    269


    of structures, systems and components. These specifications either appear
    as parameters in computer code input or in the programmed subroutines
    of the simulation computer code. A relatively few are reserved for their
    significance in the calculation of event figures-of-merit relating to the
    plant’s licensing basis. Definitions of these nominal and reserved parameter
    categories apply to both deterministic and best-estimate safety analysis, and
    are as follows:

    Nominal: Specifications that are either not expected to vary or whose
    anticipated variation is expected to have a minimal effect on design-
    basis event figures-of-merit. The assigned value includes no provision for
    parameter uncertainty.

    Reserved: Specifications that may vary and that the anticipated variation is
    expected to have a significant effect on design-basis event figures-of-merit.
    The assigned value will apply either a deterministic bias (i.e., conservative)
    or other provision to address parameter uncertainty.

    7.2 Uncertainty in Evaluation Models
    The development of the evaluation model is a task of managing
    uncertainties. Managing uncertainty involves the organization of
    observation, deduction and prediction, such that derived conclusions have a
    high likelihood of being correct. For questions of nuclear safety, observation
    refers to experimental programs and data, deduction refers to the theory of
    the physical processes and prediction refers to the application of that theory
    to estimate measurements relevant to safety concerns. In evaluation models,
    computer codes are the embodiment of that theory, confirmed by observation
    and applied for prediction.

    7.2.1 Sources of uncertainty
    To draw credible conclusions from an analysis relies on a strict adherence to
    a verifiable process for which legitimate design inputs and assumptions are
    adopted, addressing the uncertainties related to knowledge and expertise,
    data applicability, code and model development, code theory, quality
    assurance, process and phenomena, human reliability, and the consequence
    of failure. Related activities are subsequently used primarily to inform the

    270                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    setting of the reserved model input parameters and, in some situations, for
    adjusting results or the acceptance criteria.

    Knowledge and expertise uncertainty
    Knowledge and expertise uncertainty comprises the strategy used to
    translate the existing knowledge base of insights and experiences into
    evaluation model requirements. In raw form this knowledge exists
    in individuals and appears in reports and journals that preserve our
    understanding of a technology. This is manifested in the evaluation model
    development process through the identification and ranking of phenomena
    for common design-basis events, as demonstrated with the Phenomena
    Identification and Ranking Table (PIRT) process described in Chapter 6.
    Knowledge and expertise uncertainty is dominated by the subjectivity of
    the original source, whether be it an individual or organization and the
    material context of the referenced knowledge. For the PIRT, this uncertainty
    is brought into balance by accepting only corroborating statements among
    multiple independent sources. Test programs, scaling analysis and analytical
    sensitivity analysis, like studies implemented at later stages of the evaluation
    model development, are used to verify and/or improve the quality of this
    knowledge.

    Data applicability (scaling) uncertainty
    Data applicability uncertainty addresses the strategy of crediting datasets
    for demonstrating evaluation model completeness via assessment and
    uncertainty quantification. In practice, completeness is shown as a
    composite of separate-effects tests (SETs) and integral-effects tests (IETs),
    such as those presented in Chapter 5. Efficient engineering of the evaluation
    methodology depends on the appropriate reduction of the breadth of
    topical research to the essential constituents (i.e., systems, components,
    phases, geometries, fields and processes). As discussed in Chapters 5
    and 6, processes and phenomena appearing in test program data should be
    insensitive to scale effects, although with complex systems such as nuclear
    power plants, scale distortion is inevitable. Scaling analysis (Chapter 6)
    involves characterizing a process or phenomenon within its appropriate
    scaling category. Similarity criteria are identified to enable the integration of

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    271


    information at different time and space scales. The scaling analyses involves
    a two-tier review where a deductive (top-down) reasoning is combined with
    an inductive (bottom-up) analysis of the system hierarchically organized in
    subsystems, modules, constituents, phase, geometry, etc. A review of both
    the static and dynamic response of these parameters reveals the important
    phenomena as well as experiment and model distortion. Accommodation
    for notable scale distortion is incorporated into the evaluation methodology
    development process.


    Model theory uncertainty
    Model theory uncertainty analysis involves strategies for characterizing
    the completeness and applicability of individual physics models and
    correlations, both individually and as a coupled set with the computer
    code. Compromises to the theoretical basis often begin with the form of
    the governing equations. Such governing equations are then discretized in
    time and space to obtain a modified equation set that can be solved via
    a numerical algorithm. Constitutive or closure relationships are needed to
    close the equations set. Numerical strategies, often empirical, are needed
    to handle round-off errors and instabilities associated with the numerical
    solution of the modified form of the conservation equations [Ishii, 1975;
    Ransom and Scofield, 1976; Ransom, 1989].


    Phenomena and process uncertainty
    Uncertainty in the physical closure models that collectively define the
    computer code has many sources. These include those associated with
    approximation in the underlying physics and numerical algorithms, the
    settings of parameters used in physical models (including, for example,
    equation-of-state), and the selected spatial and temporal resolution. The
    uncertainty quantification is derived from comparisons between model
    predictions and experiment program data, most often from SETs. Data from
    the SETs is first separated into control and validation sets. The control set
    is used to derive the uncertainty and, as the name implies, the validation
    set is used to validate the accuracy of the uncertainty model derived from
    the control set. The uncertainty model from the control set is most often

    272                        DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    described by a bias and a probability density function. The outcomes from
    these activities are directly applicable to model parameter setting tasks.
    When assessing process and phenomena uncertainty, experiments and
    modeling will often inherit biases associated with imperfect techniques
    for acquiring results. For example, measurements of the core heat flux
    can be influenced by coolant flow, fluid properties, core geometry, fuel
    materials and configuration, the possible stochastic nature of the underlying
    phenomena, the location and density of instrumentation, calibration of
    the instrumentation, and post-test data reduction. When quantifying
    uncertainties, bookkeeping of how the data and models were prepared is
    essential to avoid unintended bias or applicability concerns resulting from
    inconsistent comparison.

    Convolution of model parameter uncertainties
    Convolution of model parameter uncertainties addresses the procedure
    for incorporating the previous uncertainties. A deterministic analysis is
    typically built from uncertainty models consisting of parameter biases.
    Depending on the relative importance of the model parameter to the
    calculated figures-of-merit, the bias may simply reflect a static error in
    a model parameter or it may define a conservative or bounding treatment
    based on a limited set of test data. Best-estimate methods focus on the
    evaluation of parametric and system response uncertainties, where system
    response uncertainties are derived from the convolution of one or more
    parametric uncertainty models. In this context uncertainty quantification
    begins with a model (or correlation), data and a clear qualitative statement
    that captures the assumptions associated with measured values.
    Figure 7.1 illustrates the difference in the convolution of uncertainty
    within deterministic and probabilistic analysis. With deterministic treatment
    key parameters are conservatively bounded, effectively “stacked” upon
    other conservatisms in a single calculation.b With probabilistic treatment
    key parameters are sampled over an uncertainty range, requiring several
    calculations.

    b Note that the procedure of stacking uncertainties is a crude simplification. In principle this may not
    yield the most conservative results unless the effect of interactions among the modeling parameter
    uncertainty is also accounted for.

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                     273

    Deterministic analysis                    Probabilistic analysis
    (a)                                        (b)

    Fig. 7.1. Contrast between deterministic and probabilistic convolution of uncertainty.


    Managing risk, human reliability and consequence of failure
    A broad definition of uncertainty quantification includes risk quantification.
    Risk quantification requires a model that takes system response metrics
    and their uncertainties as an input, and produces risk metrics and their
    uncertainties as the output. In all likelihood, the risk model itself may be
    uncertain, e.g., the health impact of a given dose of radiation. This calls for
    additional risk model details defined from the convolution of the probability
    distributions of system response metrics with the probability distributions
    of the risk metrics.

    274                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    When quantified, risk measures aid the closure argument through
    categorization and prioritization. In doing so the complexity of the
    evaluation model is reduced, thus improving the prospect for technical
    closure. As noted in Chapter 3, the nuclear industry historically organized
    design-basis events by their “condition” with respect to risk measures
    [American Nuclear Society, 1973]. Condition I events broadly captured
    all normal operational transitions within specified operational limits.
    Conditions II through IV events constitute the design-basis events licensing
    analyses. The industry refers to Condition II events as anticipated
    operational occurrences (AOOs) — deviations from any normal operation
    that are mitigated through appropriate design provisions, meaning no
    significant damage occurs to fuel or other structures, systems or components
    important to safety. Condition III and IV events are more commonly referred
    to as design-basis or postulated accidents (PAs). These are events that may
    result in fuel damage; however, any damage resulting in the release of
    radioactive material is kept within regulatory limits (10 CFR 100, Reactor
    Siting Criteria). Beyond design-basis accidents (BDBA) are Condition V
    events. They encompass the set of hypothetical core damage events of very
    low frequency but with high radiological consequence. High radiological
    consequence in this context is expected to result from the failure of multiple
    fission product barriers.
    Ultimately, the possibility of multiple failures leading to an undesirable
    situation is intrinsic in any complex system. As such, the consequence of
    such failure should be evaluated. In a broad sense, the BDBA analysis
    addresses the failure of the protection and safety systems addressing design
    basis transients and accidents. Furthermore, accident management strategies
    are developed to extend the defense-in-depth concept to respond to the
    complete failure of the balance of a plant’s defenses. Conventionally,
    probabilistic risk assessment (PRA) is the tool most often applied to quantify
    the frequency, consequence and overall risk of failure across the full-scope
    of possible plant failure mechanisms.


    7.2.2 Statistical representation of uncertainty
    Reasoning with uncertainty, the goal of the evaluation model can be
    addressed from among many different alternatives. Regardless of the

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    275


    otherwise subjective choices available in constructing an evaluation model,
    objectivity is found by correctly accounting for statistical measures and
    meaning. The methodologies for integrating simulation into evaluation
    models presented in Sections 7.3 to 7.6 are characterized by statistical
    attributes, including uncertainty parameters and variables, probability
    distribution and density functions, measures of centrality, and dispersion,
    independence and correlation. [Lurie and Moore, 1994], prepared by the
    U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), is an excellent introduction
    to the application of statistics, both for nuclear applications and generally.
    In engineering settings, results from an experiment may appear
    deterministic with respect to expectation or trends revealed from similar
    experiments performed previously; however, unless outcomes can be
    exactly determined, they retain one or more characteristics describable by
    uncertain parameters and variables. Such characteristics may relate to either
    the natural phenomenon (or more likely phenomena) being observed or to
    the method of observations, such from the effects of instrument noise or
    physical instability.
    Probability distribution is a statistical measure of the probability (P)
    of an outcome describable as the fraction of all possible measurable
    observations less than a particular value. The probability distribution
    function F is commonly expressed as

    F(x) = P(x < x),

    where x is the independent variable and x is a random variable expressly
    mapped along the axis of x. Probability density is simply the derivative of
    this function.
    A measure of centrality (central value, central location) is a quantity that
    is often used to describe a dataset of a particular outcome, be it a population
    or a sample, by a single value. The mean (arithmetic mean) is the most
    intuitive and most useful measure of centrality. However, other measures
    may be preferred (e.g., mode or median), depending on the type of data and
    the use to which the measure is put. Nonetheless, measures of centrality are
    generally considered to be the most important parameter/statistic associated
    with a dataset. A more complete description of a variable requires a measure
    of dispersion or tolerance limit, such as range or variance. The range is an
    intuitive measure of data dispersion, as a large (or small) range suggests

    276                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    large (or small) variance. If the largest and the smallest values are easy to
    spot, the calculation of the range is very easy.
    Statistical independence means that a given outcome conveys no
    information about any other outcome. This may be assessed by examining
    the outcomes from repeated observations. Independent random variables
    have the property that the probability of observing the combination of two
    or more particular outcomes is equal to the product of the probabilities of
    the individual outcomes.

    P( A ∗ B) = P( A) ∗ P(B),

    where P( A) and P(B) are the probabilities of independent outcomes.
    Abstractly, the concept of convolution may be described as the
    combination of functions, such as with the many models and correlations
    that appear in a nuclear safety computer code. In statistics, the common
    explanation of convolution is with respect to the probability density of
    independent random variables. In that context, the convolution density is the
    probability density resulting from the product of the independent probability
    densities.

    7.3 Deterministic Methods
    Deterministic methods represent the most common approach to the
    consideration of uncertainty in safety analysis. In historical context there
    are natural reasons relating to incomplete knowledge and limited analytical
    capacity that have contributed to the development of these methods. More
    generally, the reasons may be drawn from the perspectives of uncertainty
    appearing in the last section: it is just simpler to identify bounding conditions
    for processes and phenomena than it is to describe statistical functions
    and propagate the individual uncertainties to estimate the uncertainties of
    particular outcomes.
    In a deterministic nuclear safety analysis application, a plant’s design
    basis will be characterized by its performance in a suite of scenarios
    selected to represent the more likely situations challenging fuel, RCS and
    containment integrity. Outcomes from these simulations are considered
    conservative by virtue of the bounded treatment of plant process and
    phenomenological uncertainties. By including processes in this exercise,

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    277


    uncertainties related to the availability of plant safety-related equipment,
    the plant’s technical specifications and limiting conditions of operation, and
    operator actions are also captured. Collectively, the outcomes derived from
    simulation using a set of bounded reserved model parameters will define
    the plant’s performance threshold, beyond which fission product barriers
    are assumed to have failed.

    7.3.1 Historical significance
    The first published Safety Analysis Report was prepared by the Atomic
    Energy Commission (AEC) in 1957. Entitled, “Theoretical Possibilities
    and Consequences of Major Accidents in Large Nuclear Power Plants”,
    it is better known by its report number: WASH-740 [U.S. Atomic Energy
    Commission, 1957]. This study examined the consequences of a reactor
    accident involving the release of radioactivity, a logical effort following
    the 1955 “Atoms for Peace” conference. Of course, the understanding of
    nuclear accident progression and its consequences was relatively primitive
    as compared to today.
    Given the relative lack of knowledge of nuclear accident progression,
    the study applied general assumptions about the plant design and the
    subsequent accident. Specifically, it simply considered a system with a
    thermal output of 500 MW, assumed the worst meteorological conditions,
    with no containment building, and that half the reactor core’s fission
    products was released into the atmosphere as micrometer-sized pellets.
    Where information was sufficiently complete, the study authors chose best-
    estimate values; however, for details with a high degree of uncertainty,
    they chose values “believed to be on the pessimistic (high hazard) side”.
    Predictably, the conclusions of that study estimated large casualties: 3,400
    deaths, 43,000 injuries and a property damage of $7 billion.
    At the time WASH-740 was released, regulated safety emphasized just
    remote siting and containment. Given the lack of knowledge exposed by
    WASH-740, research and development to support a commercial nuclear
    power industry was accelerated. A large number of nuclear power systems
    were built and tested. From these programs the first commercial nuclear
    power stations were built and licensed. The early success inspired a large
    number of orders, which was followed by a demand for larger plants with
    flexible siting options. The AEC worked with the industry to develop the

    278                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    defense-in-depth regulatory framework, which became the foundation of
    today’s industry (see Chapter 2). In doing so, design and safety objectives
    focused on a larger set of critical safety functions (see Chapter 2) that
    allowed relief from the original remote siting requirement.
    Among the critical safety functions, particular attention was given to
    core heat removal by emergency core cooling systems. It was viewed that
    the most likely scenario that would result in radiological release would
    come from a core melt during a loss-of-coolant accident (LOCA). As such,
    core heat removal represented a surrogate to the real nuclear safety concern
    of radiological release, and was very amenable to testing and analysis by
    computer. Developments on both the testing and analytical modeling fronts
    incurred early setbacks that received public attention. In the United States,
    this ultimately led to a government review known in the nuclear industry as
    the emergency core cooling system (ECCS) hearings.
    The outcome from the ECCS hearings was a set of acceptance
    criteria for emergency core cooling systems and a deterministic method
    for evaluation. The latter appears in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations
    and is commonly referred to by its document location: 10 CFR 50.46
    and 10 CFR 50 Appendix K (or just “Appendix K”). The latter not only
    established rules for the industry to follow when preparing a deterministic
    safety analysis, it also established a precedent for a process for the
    consideration of science and engineering in a regulatory setting. It was
    not a popular precedent; however, it was more a lasting legacy in that its
    weaknesses have contributed to the expansion of research that has led to the
    modern concepts of the evaluation model.

    7.3.2 Methodology characteristics
    Regardless of the state of knowledge or the availability of computing
    resources, deterministic safety analysis methods are applicable in a broad
    range of circumstances. Statistically, the setting of the reserved model
    parameters of a computer code is simply an exercise in quantifying a
    tolerance limit. A tolerance limit is intended to bound a specified proportion
    of an outcome population where the outcome is some figure-of-merit used to
    judge the adequacy of a design. The adequacy is determined by ensuring that
    the upper tolerance limit (UTL) does not exceed logical bounds identified
    from the knowledge of physical limits.

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    279


    As addressed in the early 1970s with the ECCS hearings in the United
    States, limited knowledge sometimes requires a measure of consensus
    by a board of subject matter experts. Backed by documented evidence
    of technical review and deliberation, methods can be developed for the
    meaningful assessment of safety using computer codes that are built
    upon experiential, rather than science-based, understanding. Such methods
    will be described by sets of suitably conservative assumptions and
    procedures, which together with the computer codes comprise appropriately
    conservative evaluation models. Of course, when further experimental
    information or improved calculational techniques become available, then
    such conservatisms may be re-evaluated to assess whether a more realistic
    approach can be taken.
    In applications to real problems like nuclear power plant safety, the
    conservative, deterministic approach is adopted to ensure that the actual
    plant response in relation to an acceptance criterion is bounded by the
    conservative estimate for that response produced from simulation. Recall
    from Chapter 3 that the figures-of-merit typically represent physical loads
    that are imposed upon a structure, system or component relied upon to
    prevent or mitigate the human exposure to the harmful effects of radiation.
    Frequently in nuclear safety analysis, pressure and temperature will be those
    figures-of-merit. In that example a well-formed deterministic evaluation
    model will result in peak estimates for these loads, such that
    Pestimate > Pactual and Testimate > Tactual .                  (7.1)
    To ensure a high likelihood of this outcome, a considerable effort focused
    on assessing the propagation of the bounded process and phenomenological
    uncertainty is necessary. While often originally identified from “expert
    elicitation” (e.g., PIRT from Chapter 6), prioritization, implementation and
    verification of these treatments comprise the bulk of the development of a
    deterministic evaluation model.

    7.3.2.1 Prioritization
    Prioritization in nuclear safety analysis is a hierarchical process beginning
    from the policy-level requirements expressed by national nuclear regulators
    that the design and analysis of applicable events incorporate the resolution
    of safety goals for the operation of the plant. Regulations subsequently state

    280                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    that assessments of safety must contain an evaluation of the major structures,
    systems and components of the plant that are important to safety. The highest
    level of prioritization is the set of goals for the project which is followed by
    an evaluation of major “structures, systems and components (i.e., safety-
    related structures)”. As discussed in Chapter 6 for PIRT and for scaling and
    prioritization, goals proceed through levels of specificity to identify priority
    tasks to complete the evaluation model.
    Contemporary nuclear safety deterministic methods are not exempt
    from considering the prioritization hierarchy in this manner; however,
    much of the practice involving PIRT and scaling was developed after the
    establishment of the deterministic safety analysis. Rather, priorities for
    deterministic methods evolved with a strong influence from national nuclear
    regulators and industry working groups.

    7.3.2.2 Practice derived from regulators
    As expressed internationally in nuclear regulations, the primary nuclear
    power plant’s safety goal is the protection of the public from an uncontrolled
    release of fission products into the environment. Regulations have evolved
    to recognize the value of a defense-in-depth strategy that reduces the
    likelihood of a catastrophic event through multiple layers of physical, design
    and operational defenses. The philosophy behind defense-in-depth (see
    Chapter 2) is hierarchically arranged from concerns related to reactivity
    transient, fuel integrity, coolant system integrity, containment integrity and
    emergency response. Regulations have evolved from this philosophy that
    impose constraints on every aspect of the design process and the verification
    thereof.
    Adoption of the defense-in-depth philosophy facilitates very specific
    nuclear power plant design requirements. Design criteria result from the
    consideration of these requirements measured against a plant’s critical
    safety functions. In the United States, the General Design Criteria (GDC)
    appears in the Code of Federal Regulations as Appendix A to 10 CFR 50.
    Admittedly, the expression of these GDC has been influenced by the original
    selection of the light-water reactor (LWR) technology developed in the
    1950s and early 1960s. As such, the design criteria expressed is articulated
    with some technology bias. For example, the regulations mention the
    front-line structures, systems and components important to preventing and

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    281


    mitigating radiological consequences in LWRs as fuel rods, control rod
    drive mechanisms, reactor pressure vessel and the containment structure.
    Of course, other design concepts may deviate in terminology and the role
    of these structures, systems or components.
    While the safety analysis requirements are derived from each of these
    criteria, there is one assumption that underlies the basis for many, and that is
    single-failure. Accommodation for single-failure relates to the reliability of
    protection systems. The criteria related to single-failure resiliency requires
    that (1) safety-related systems are designed to perform their safety functions
    assuming any single-failure in the system or in an associated support system,
    and (2) plant safety analyses are performed to demonstrate adequate design
    margin for even the most limiting single-failure. As presented in Chapter 2,
    a single-failure analysis is performed to identify the most limiting single-
    failure through a systematic search of potential single-failures and evaluate
    the effect of each single-failure on the ability of plant safety systems to
    satisfy specified acceptance criteria.
    While single-failure as conceived in regulations is presented in the
    context of design, several specific requirements are directly applicable for
    performing safety analysis such as those appearing in Table 7.1, from [U.S.
    Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2005b]. Nearly all of these requirements
    relate to the availability of systems, as introduced in Section 7.3. Most
    significant among these regarding the outcome of safety analyses is the
    single-failure that eliminates the availability of offsite power for the
    operation of active protection systems. As such, combinations of fail-safe
    characteristics and redundancy have been incorporated into designs that are
    deterministically addressed in evaluation models.
    The regulatory position on the interpretation of regulations as they
    apply to safety analysis has evolved through the development and revisions
    of the NRC’s Standard Review Plan, beginning with the publication of
    NUREG-75/087 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1975] in 1975.
    Before that, individual review plans existed but they were not published in a
    single authoritative document. NUREG-75/087 was revised and reissued as
    NUREG-0800 in 1981, which has since been revised several times, typically
    consisting of motivated interactions within working groups advocating for
    the industry, such as the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in the
    United States or similar international agencies.

    282                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Table 7.1. Regulations pertaining to single-failure (Derived from [U.S. Nuclear
    Regulatory Commission, 2005b]).

    Location                 Title of GDC                         Description of use

    Appendix A,       Electric power systems          Establishes the single-failure
    GDC 17                                             requirement for onsite electric power
    supplies and distribution system.
    Appendix A,       Protection system               Establishes a general single-failure
    GDC 21             reliability and testability     requirement for protection systems.
    Appendix A,       Protection system               Establishes the single-failure
    GDC 25             requirements for                requirement for protection systems,
    reactivity control              specifically for reactivity control
    systems                         systems.
    Appendix A,       Residual heat removal           Sets out the single-failure requirement
    GDC 34                                             for residual heat removal systems.
    Appendix A,       Emergency core cooling          States the single-failure requirement for
    GDC 35                                             the ECCS.
    Appendix A,       Containment heat removal        Establishes the single-failure
    GDC 38                                             requirement for the containment heat
    removal system.
    Appendix A,       Cooling water                   Establishes the single-failure
    GDC 44                                             requirement for cooling water
    systems used to transfer heat from
    systems important to safety to an
    ultimate heat sink.
    Appendix          ECCS evaluation models          Establishes single-failure requirement
    K(I)(A)                                            for determining the limiting power
    distribution assumed as part of the
    required and acceptable features of
    the evaluation model.
    Appendix          ECCS evaluation models          Establishes single-failure requirement
    K(I)(D)                                            for evaluating post-blowdown heat
    removal by the ECCS.

    7.3.2.3 Practice derived from industry working groups
    Industry working groups include those representing specific interest of
    various industry constituencies, including regulators. Sponsorship of these
    working groups may or may not be directly through industry support;
    however, membership is primarily made out of people advocating for
    industry needs. Regarding the development of nuclear safety evaluation
    methods, several national and international groups have been commissioned

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    283


    to resolve technical concerns shared by the users of nuclear safety computer
    codes. Predominant among these have been those related to the development
    of the Utility Requirements Document and International Standard Problems.

    7.3.2.4 Utility requirements document and technical
    specifications
    Two utility requirements documents are recognized internationally — one
    organized by EPRI and the other by the European Union. Both have
    been developed and revised through interactions between the groups.
    As such, there is considerable overlap of content. The contents of the
    utility requirements document begin where the plant’s GDC appearing
    in regulations ends and the specificity has had a direct impact on the
    preparation of safety analyses through the development of a plant’s
    Technical Specifications.
    All utilities are required to support their plant’s Technical Specifications
    with a basic document. This document provides the technical reasoning,
    method or calculation supporting a particular licensing limit or technical
    specification. To what extent the design basis calculation (or any other
    analysis) supports a plant’s licensing basis can vary from plant-to-plant.
    In practice, the utility customer defines the plant’s licensing basis.
    Since safety analyses provide the strongest support for the licensing basis,
    the primary goal a utility customer has with regard to the performance of
    safety analysis is to achieve coverage for the relevant limits of operation.
    A secondary goal is to recognize those operational elements whose limits
    of operation may vary over time and approximate the long-term limits of
    operations. While incorporating such bounding limits of operation removes
    the analysis margin, the applicability of the safety analysis is hopefully
    maintained for a longer period of time, thus saving the cost of reanalysis.
    While the collection of safety analyses defines the design envelope,
    there is no requirement for any given analysis to support every required
    licensing element (nor is that possible). For example, PWR design
    parameters such as RCS pressure and temperature, accumulator pressure
    and temperature, various setpoints, and secondary feedwater flow rate,
    pressure and liquid level have either negligible or inconclusive influence
    on most safety analyses figures-of-merit; however, they are characterized
    with limits supporting plant licensing. The basis for such parameter limits

    284                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    may be derived from methods unrelated to the specific event being analyzed;
    hence, explicit treatment may not be required.

    7.3.2.5 International standard problems
    Since the mid-1970s, a significant amount of industry attention has been
    focused on how nuclear safety computer codes are to be used to resolve
    technical issues. In particular, the International Code Assessment Program
    established by the Nuclear Energy Agency of the Organization for Economic
    Co-operation and Development (OECD/NEA) have sponsored a large
    number of international standard problems (ISP). These ISPs enlisted
    both software developers and safety analysts to apply system codes using
    institutional practices to a common problem.
    Through the scores of ISPs conducted, insight has been revealed about
    the capabilities and limits of nuclear safety computer codes. Inevitably,
    many errors of omission and commission have been identified and resolved,
    and intolerable limits on applicability removed. As significant as these
    contributions have been to the improvement of safety analysis, possibly
    the most significant outcome from these exercises was the role of the user
    in the preparation of safety analysis models.
    Invariably, modeling and simulation solutions to ISPs displayed a
    surprising breadth of results. Beyond differences in code capabilities, it was
    found that the flexible user-defined input presented endless opportunities for
    creative modeling and the application of user-options. This so-called User
    Effect [Ashley et al., 1998] was described as the consequence of a robust
    and flexible modeling interface popular within the modeling and simulation
    community.
    Uncertainty of this kind is difficult to characterize; however,
    deterministic principals were recognized and articulated to improve the
    objectivity of analysis. The most common strategy used is to define a priori
    restrictions on nodalization and the application of user options that are
    codified into procedures. User guidance should include:

    (1) Proper use of the program for the particular plant-specific transient or
    accident being considered.
    (2) Range of applicability for the transient or accident being analyzed.
    (3) Code limitations for such transients and accidents.

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    285


    (4) Recommended modeling options for the transient being considered,
    equipment required and choice of nodalization schemes (plant
    nodalization should be consistent with the nodalization used in
    assessment cases).

    A pragmatic approach is established where chosen nodalization
    strategies and modeling options selected for the prototypical application
    are associated to the practical extent of the choices made to simulate
    SETs and IETs that support the qualification of the evaluation model
    for the application of interest combined with identified scaling trends.
    This approach ensures a desired level of consistency and objectivity in
    the modeling. Strict adherence to such instructions minimizes or removes
    nodalization and the freedom to manipulate noding, as a contributor to
    uncertainty.
    Inherent in these activities is the assumption that engineering judgment
    will be applied to determine the degree of nodalization resolution that
    is necessary while still being practical. It is a goal of these instructions
    to specify any application of engineering judgment incorporated into the
    LOCA and non-LOCA methodologies, along with the mechanistic rules
    required to achieve the following goals:

    • Discriminate key structure characteristics
    • Obtain acceptable steady-state agreement with the plant
    • Preserve dominant phenomena
    • Maintain reasonable computational economics
    • Maintain scalability
    • Preserve accuracy, numerical stability and convergence

    The modeling task is a mathematical mapping from the physical system
    to the computational framework of the evaluation model. It is well-known
    that different approaches to this task can yield different results. Note that
    the full-scope of modeling guidance considers the standard nuclear plant
    nodalization to be all computer code input necessary to represent the
    physical plant and any engineered features influencing plant performance.
    These include trips and control systems, component dynamics (e.g.,
    pumps), neutronic definition, fuel state description and ECCS performance.

    286                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    In addition, these computer codes often include flags and other plant-
    independent input for specific phenomenological code models.

    7.3.2.6 Implementation
    Implementation activities involve the method for introducing the bounded
    model parameter treatment. This may occur at the time in which the
    analysis is performed via the simulation code’s model input file or embedded
    explicitly into the programming of the simulation code. In the latter case
    the computer code is promoted as a “conservative” code and caution must
    be taken to assure that use of the code is done within the limits expressed
    for it application.
    As previously stated, implementation (regardless of evaluation
    methodology) is through a set of reserved parameters. These parameters
    may be binned into categories — credited plant state, initial and boundary
    conditions, and phenomena and processes — reflecting a mapping between
    the physical application and the analytical solution method. The credited
    plant state describes the plant design as it is to be considered in the analysis.
    In a deterministic evaluation model the availability of systems is assessed
    before the mathematical model is prepared. Non-safety systems are almost
    always ignored (unless they acerbate the loads being assessed). In addition,
    various safety-related systems (including control systems) may or may not
    be included based on a design requirement or because they may not be
    relevant in a particular study.
    Initial and boundary conditions represent the operational plant state.
    In deterministic methods the set of reserved model parameters related to
    operational conditions are biased to their performance tolerance limit. Many
    of these parameters will relate to the plant’s Technical Specifications and
    fall into one of the following categories:

    • Structure, system or component design limits
    • Operational drift limits
    • Equipment operation constraints
    • Operational mode limits
    • Environment load limits
    • Regulated load limits (e.g., various ASME acceptance criterion)
    • Instrumentation and control setpoints limits

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    287


    Model parameter biases related to phenomena and process uncertainty
    may be implemented either explicitly in the simulation code or as model
    parameter input. In either situation, the select bias must consider all
    predominant components to uncertainty. Quantification of uncertainties
    usually requires comparisons of analytical models against experiments.
    Unless prior investment has been made to reveal such detail, this can
    be expensive; however, alternative methods such as the consideration of
    physical limits or expanded tolerance limits on whatever data is available
    has often found acceptance.


    7.3.3 Verification
    Following the requirements and insights derived from prioritization and
    implementation exercises, the subsequent evaluation model inherently
    retains subjectivity based on engineering judgment of the importance of the
    many individual components in the modeling process. At a fundamental
    level, the technical basis relies on this considerable experience base and
    the input prescription reflects consistency from this previous experience.
    Nonetheless, reliance on engineering judgment requires justification
    through verification. The majority of engineering judgment resides with the
    preparation of the simulation codes credited in the nuclear safety analysis.
    Chapters 4 and 5 provide a broad explanation of the effort involved in
    demonstrating the adequacy of these computer codes.
    During evaluation model development, sensitivity in the key figures-
    of-merit to variations in modeling is examined. This effort focuses on
    certain key components of the reactor system. These components are chosen
    based on their potential influence on the dominant phenomena identified in
    PIRTs. For each of these specific areas, a discussion, supported by either
    physical arguments or by sensitivity studies, is prepared stating why the
    given prescription is acceptable.
    The three-fold verification approach in Figure 7.2 captures the basic
    mechanics of implementing an evaluation methodology.
    A considerable amount of analysis is performed initially to shakedown
    both codes and parameter models to demonstrate adequacy. The first step
    involves the development of plant, test facility and simplified/reduced-order
    models for V&V. This is the stage in which engineering judgment (i.e.,

    288                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 7.2. Simplified illustration of the evaluation methodology.


    PIRTs) is applied and refined. The actual design and process analysis comes
    in the second step in the form of both the sensitivity and uncertainty analysis.
    Uncertainty analysis is used in its most general definition in which
    uncertainty may be addressed, deterministically or probabilistically.
    Perturbation studies, in the form of sensitivity and uncertainty analysis,
    can be used to define the scope of the other studies depending on the chosen
    evaluation methodology approach. For example, just as sensitivity studies
    can be used to define a response surface for uncertainty analysis, uncertainty
    analysis can be used to determine sensitivity parameters through rank and
    analysis of variance methods (see Section 7.4.3.4). For example, [Martin,
    2016] provides a best-estimate plus uncertainty (BEPU) based method used
    to inform the identification and selection of a deterministically limiting event
    scenario.
    Lastly, there are undoubtedly situations that fall outside the normal
    scope of sensitivity and uncertainty analysis of a complex system. The
    third step provides for a suite of separate situational or disposition studies,
    applying either deterministic or probabilistic methods, used to complete
    the scope of analysis necessary to satisfy the expectations for resolving a
    technical issue through analysis. For example, analysis is frequently needed
    at a level of detail greater than what is typical in a simulation computer

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                      289


    code. The level of detail can refer to either spatial resolution, such as
    that provided by computational fluid dynamics (CFD), or multi-physics
    interactions requiring specialized computer codes. In all situations, selected
    results from existing sensitivity or uncertainty analyses are incorporated as
    input to the disposition calculations.
    Regardless of whether analysis is performed deterministically or
    probabilistically, the preparation of the analysis is similar:

    • Identifying code parameters important to analysis measures-of-interest
    • Quantifying uncertainty treatment for a set of important parameters (e.g.,
    biases and/or probability density functions)
    • Generating any pre-requisite input data (e.g., fuel/core analysis or plant
    data)
    • Developing base input for analytical tools (e.g., RELAP5)
    • Building a calculation suite from the knowledge of uncertainty domain
    • Performing calculations

    The scope of issues that can be addressed within the normal analytical
    domain (i.e., Plant/V&V Models and Perturbations Studies as shown
    in Figure 7.2) is determined by (1) the code capability and its range-
    of-applicability and (2) the form of the evaluation methodology. The
    development of new analytical capability or modeled physics serves to
    reduce the number of situational or “what if” studies through explicit
    treatment in the normal analytical domain.

    7.4 Best-Estimate Analysis Methods
    In contrast to traditional conservative-deterministic analysis methods
    described in the previous section, best-estimate approaches seek a
    statistically characterized result where the figure-of-merit estimate lies
    within a quantified uncertainty range, e.g.,

    Pbest-estimate − Puncertainty < Pactual < Pbest-estimate + Puncertainty
    or                                           (7.2)
    Tbest-estimate − Tuncertainty < Tactual < Tbest-estimate + Tuncertainty.

    290                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Implicit in this description is that the scenario and model uncertainties
    impacting outcomes are known beyond simple biases. That said, the
    sources of uncertainty are many and multi-faceted, and a database
    reflecting complete knowledge of the study is not practical. Rather, the
    evaluation model is designed considering the more impactful contributors
    to outcome uncertainty. Uncertainties of those contributions are quantified
    and propagated through an analysis. Consequently, a very large majority
    of model parameters are not statistically represented. These parameters
    are treated nominally or with a conservative bias. As such, there is still
    a significant conservative component remaining in current best-estimate
    analyses.
    However, adoption of conservative assumptions to overcome the lack
    of knowledge has to be exercised with care. Unquestioning reliance on
    deterministic evaluation models had unintended consequences. Certain
    analysis settings were discovered that showed that assumptions that
    otherwise appeared to be conservative in one situation were not so reliable in
    other situations. As thermal-hydraulic system codes improved, meaningful
    insight into the relevant event phenomena became possible.

    7.4.1 Historical significance
    In the early 1970s, with regulation regarding the acceptance of analytical
    safety analysis of the recognized maximum credible accident, the large-
    break LOCA was constrained by highly conservative assumptions because
    of the limited experimental and analytical database. In 1988, after an era of
    data-gathering and model-building (compiled in [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 1988]), the NRC revised the emergency core cooling system
    (ECCS) rule contained in 10 CFR 50.46 and Appendix K (published in
    the Federal Register 53 FR 35996) to permit more realistic analyses of
    the ECCS performance. The change provided by this rulemaking retained
    the safety margin by requiring that analytical uncertainties be explicitly
    treated.
    To assist the industry with the development of LOCA evaluation
    methodologies, the NRC published the Regulatory Guide 1.157
    [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1989] and a sample methodology
    entitled, “Code, Scaling, Applicability and Uncertainty” (CSAU) [Boyack
    et al., 1989]. Early attempts by U.S. nuclear plants and fuel suppliers

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    291


    applying a parametric treatment of uncertainties, emulating the CSAU
    approach, were criticized for the limitations imposed from the application
    of response surfaces. Specifically, broad treatment of model uncertainties
    results in a geometrically increasing number of calculations required for
    defining a complete response surface. The apparent limitations of CSAU
    inspired the nuclear safety community to seek methods alleviating the
    known challenge.
    Coincident with the development of the evaluation methodologies
    based or inspired by CSAU, mostly in the United States, several
    methodologies were being developed internationally and coordinated by
    the OECD/NEA/CSNI (Organization for Economic Co-operation and
    Development/Nuclear Energy Agency/Committee on Safety of Nuclear
    Installations). The Uncertainty Methodology Study (UMS) was the first
    such initiative. In the UMS study (1995–97) five uncertainty methods were
    compared [Wickett, 1998]. In 2004 the CSNI and the Working Group on
    Accident Management and Analysis (WGAMA) organized the BEMUSE
    program. The operational objectives of the BEMUSE program included
    an assessment of the applicability of the best-estimate and uncertainty and
    sensitivity methods to integral tests (LOFT L2-5, in particular) and their
    use in reactor applications [Petruzzi et al., 2004c; Petruzzi et al., 2006;
    Bazin et al., 2007; Glaeser et al., 2011]. One of the main conclusions of the
    BEMUSE program was the role of engineering judgment in the selection and
    application of SETs for deriving uncertainty treatments. This “uncertainty-
    method-user effect” became the focus of a OECD/NEA benchmark called
    PREMIUM (Post-BEMUSE Reflood Model Input Uncertainty Methods
    Reference) launched in 2011 and completed in 2015 [Skorek and de
    Crécy, 2016].


    7.4.2 Methodologies based on propagation of input
    uncertainties
    The propagation of input uncertainties refers to the convolution of
    uncertainties associated with model parameters with respect to test data,
    most often derived from code-to-test comparison considering SET data.
    There are a number of ways that the underlying probability distribution
    function may be established.

    292                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Response surface
    The response surface method for resolving the underlying probability
    distribution function of an outcome dependent on the convolution of
    component uncertainties is established by regression analysis. This can be
    viewed simply as a multinomial least-squares fitting process of a figure-of-
    merit in terms of the important parameters selected above. The purpose of
    the response surface is to replace the code by a fit to the output of interest
    (here the peak cladding temperature, i.e., PCT). The response surface acts
    as a surrogate or emulator of the code input-output relationship. A number
    of underlying assumptions have to be made concerning the behavior of
    the output relative to that of the input (e.g., the output is a continuous
    function of the input); and, as discussed below, the order of the polynomials
    is restricted by considering the amount of data available and the structure
    of the calculational matrix.
    The purpose of the sensitivity calculations is to provide the necessary
    data for the response surface methodology (a combination of curve-
    fitting and Monte Carlo sampling that generates a probability distribution
    function). This process defines the mean value and standard deviation of
    the desired calculated outcomes (figures-of-merit). The amount of data
    needed to describe a response surface is discussed in the standard texts and
    specialized publications [Lurie and Moore, 1994; Myers, 1971; Johnson,
    and Leone, 1977; Connor and Zelen, 1959; Ciatworthy et al., 1957; Box and
    Behnken, 1960]. A significant challenge with response surface methods is
    that the number of calculations increases exponentially with the number of
    independent parameters. For example, in one method [Connor and Zelen,
    1959] a complete description at a three-level polynomial formulation using
    a “central composite design” would require more than 2,000 calculations.
    For a five-level polynomial formulation, more than 70,000 calculations
    are needed! However, practical implementations were developed and
    licensed for industry applications. For example, the Westinghouse Electric
    Company’s (WEC) early best-estimate evaluation model was accepted by
    the NRC as applicable to analyze large-break LOCA (LBLOCA) events
    in 1996 [Young et al., 1998]. The WEC’s implementation of the response
    surface method required about 50 simulations.

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    293


    To use the response surface technique, each of the input parameters
    must have an associated range of variation (+ one or two levels) and have
    an underlying probability distribution function. Often, the true distribution
    of the data is typically unknown, in which case the assumption of uniform
    distributions is acceptable. This choice does not imply that the data is
    actually uniform. The uniform distribution requires only that the end points
    (the range) be specified and does not imply that any value of the parameter
    is more likely than any other value; it is often referred to as the distribution
    that maximizes lack of knowledge (maximum entropy). This choice of the
    range, based on data considerations, tends to be conservative.
    The response surface fits the code predictions obtained for selected
    parameters and is used instead of the original computer code. Such an
    approach then entails the use of a limited number of uncertain parameters
    in order to reduce the number of code runs and the cost of analysis.

    Monte Carlo
    Monte Carlo covers a very wide range of methods and the reader should
    consult any text on random sampling methods (e.g., [Lurie and Moore,
    1994]). This is a simple procedure where most of the input parameters
    considered uncertain are randomly sampled. When a specific input is
    dependent on other inputs, the procedure should account for such a
    relationship. These values of the parameters randomly chosen are inserted
    in the regression and a value of the PCT is found. This process is repeated
    many times (100,000 trials, for example) and a table of the PCT is collected.
    The result is a frequency histogram that is interpreted as a probability
    distribution function of the outcome. From this histogram we may determine
    the standard statistics desired (mean, mode, 95th percentile, etc.). The
    advantage of a Monte Carlo procedure is that an unlimited number of model
    uncertainties can be explicitly considered simultaneously.

    Order-statistics
    To overcome the complexity of performing several thousand simulations,
    order-statistics procedures can be utilized to infer an UTL of a population
    of outcomes from relatively small trials. As its name implies, order

    294                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    statistics involve the organization of samples by magnitude. For example,
    the first order-statistic is always the minimum of the sample and the
    last order-statistic is the maximum. It is a non-parametric approach to
    statistical quantification, meaning no assumptions about the probability
    distributions of the figures-of-merit being assessed are made (in contrast
    to parametric/response-surface methods). As with a full Monte Carlo
    procedure, an unlimited number of model uncertainties can be explicitly
    considered simultaneously. The results or “measurements” produced from
    each experiment are the pre-determined figures-of-merit.
    The advantages of this approach — no limits on parameter treatments,
    reduced number of calculations, direct computer code simulation — were
    recognized by the nuclear safety community in the mid-1990s. One
    disadvantage of this method is that the samples are subject to statistical
    fluctuations inherent with any randomly sampled data set of limited size.
    Samples near the tails of the distribution, usually those of primary interest
    in safety analysis, are particularly sensitive. Nonetheless, by 2010, several
    applications of order statistics safety analysis were developed in support
    of commercial nuclear power plant licensure, including evaluation models
    from AREVA (Framatome), General Electric, and Westinghouse [Martin
    and O’Dell, 2005; Abdelghany and Martin, 2010; Martin, 2012; Sarikaya,
    2008; Frepoli et al., 2004; Frepoli and Ohkawa, 2011].

    7.4.3 Mathematical basis of order statistics
    Starting with Wilks [1941], non-parametric methods have been used to
    determine tolerance limits. Tables created by Somerville [1958] have been
    used widely for non-parametric tolerances in a variety of applications,
    including a few in the nuclear engineering field (e.g., [U.S. Nuclear
    Regulatory Commission, 1978; Jaech, 1972]). Non-parametric statistical
    techniques are useful in situations where you do not explicitly need an
    expression of the probability distribution, such as where a tolerance limit is
    all that is desired or where acceptance or rejection is based on meeting a limit
    is to be determined. This is the case for LBLOCA where the acceptance
    criteria on PCT, and on cladding oxidation need to be demonstrated. In
    this case, the upper 95% tolerance limit on the calculated values must
    be shown.

    Deterministic and Best-Estimate Analysis Methods                    295


    7.4.3.1 Derivation of the uni-variate case
    The statistics problem statement considers a random sample xk from among
    a set of samples (i.e., computer code output). From the probability theory
    the probability (β) that the fraction of the parent population less than xk
    exceeds the fraction γ is given by:
     ∞
    P[F(xk ) < γ ] = β =       f (x)dx .              (7.3)
    xk

    The function f (x) is the (unknown) probability density function of
    the figure-of-merit, representing the relative likelihood for this random
    variable to occur at a given point in the observation space. It retains
    the property that the integral over the observation of x is F(x), the
    (unknown) cumulative distribution function, completely describing the
    probability distribution of the random variable x. At the range limit of
    x, F(x) = 1.
    Without knowledge in the density and distribution of x, this generic
    expression is of little value. A more useful expression can be constructed
    when n samples of this random variable are drawn, {x1 ; x2 ; . . . ; xk ; . . . ; xn }
    and sorted in numerical order, such that {x1 < x2 < · · · < xk < · · · < xn }.
    In this scenario the probability statement identifying any sample bounding
    as a fraction γ of the population of x can be written in terms of the
    convenience function m = n − k as:
     1
    P[F(xk ) > γ ] = β =       gm (ξ )dξ.                     (7.4)
    γ

    Here gm (ξ ) is the probability density function of the population
    coverage of the sorted sample. In this form an expression for gm (ξ ) can be
    derived.
    To begin consider the simply probability statement:

    1 = (S + F)n ,                                 (

=== Chapter 8 — PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events (F.X. Buschman, M.J. Meholic) ===
8.1 Introduction to PWRs
    The pressurized water reactor (PWR) design started in the United States
    as part of the U.S. Naval Nuclear Propulsion Program and developed as
    a land-based central generating station, beginning with the Shippingport
    atomic power station in Pennsylvania. It is the most common nuclear power
    plant design deployed in the world. In a PWR the primary coolant is water
    maintained under very high pressure, typically at 2250 psia (15.5 MPa), to
    allow high coolant temperatures without steam formation within the reactor.
    The heat transported out of the reactor core by the primary coolant is then
    transferred to a secondary loop containing the “working fluid” by a steam
    generator (SG). Such systems typically contain two to four primary coolant
    loops and associated SGs.
    The PWR primary loop contains the nuclear heat source consisting
    of a nuclear fuel core positioned within a reactor vessel where the energy
    resulting from the controlled fission reaction is transformed into sensible
    heat in the fuel and moderator, and is ultimately transferred to the coolant.
    The coolant is pumped to the SG where the heat is transferred to a secondary
    loop through a number of tubes in the SG. The reactor coolant then returns to
    the reactor vessel to be heated. An electrically heated pressurizer connected
    to the loop maintains a system pressure high enough such that bulk boiling
    does not occur in the reactor core.


    333

    334                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    In the secondary loop, dry saturated or superheated steam produced
    in the SG flows to a turbine-generator where it is expanded to convert
    the thermal energy into mechanical energy and hence electrical energy.
    The expanded steam exhausts to a condenser where the latent heat of
    vaporization is transferred to the tertiary cooling system and the steam is
    condensed. The condensate is then reheated and pumped back to the SG to
    continue the cycle.
    The tertiary loop is the heat rejection loop where the excess heat
    is rejected to the environment through the condenser cooling water.
    Depending on the specific site, this heat is released to a river, lake, ocean
    or cooling tower system. Figure 8.1 shows a typical PWR flow circuit with
    the primary and secondary loops.


    8.2 Design-Basis Accidents and Anticipated Transients
    To ensure that the design of a nuclear power plant provides adequate
    protection to the safety of the public and the environment, the impact of
    anticipated and postulated events, and equipment failures and malfunctions
    are evaluated. The anticipated transients and accidents that result from these
    events are characterized by their impact on the reactor coolant system (RCS)
    and by their anticipated frequency.
    Events that are expected to occur one or more times during the lifetime
    of a nuclear power plant are commonly referred to as anticipated operational
    occurrences (AOOs). Events that are not expected to occur but for which
    it has been postulated that they could occur are often called postulated
    accidents (PAs). As explained in Chapter 3, the expected frequency of
    occurrence is used to determine the appropriate acceptance criteria to ensure
    that no undue hazard to the public or the environment would exist if or when
    the event takes place.
    The type of AOOs and PAs is determined by the impact of the event
    on the RCS. For a PWR, these events fall into the following general
    types: overcooling (an increase in heat removal by the secondary system),
    undercooling (a decrease in heat removal by the secondary system),
    flow rate transients (decrease or increase in primary system flow rate),
    an increase in primary system inventory, a decrease in primary system
    inventory, reactivity insertions or unintended changes in power distribution.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           335

    Fig. 8.1. Closed PWR cycle.


    Consideration is given to what might occur if the reactor protection
    system fails to respond to these events as intended, generally by providing
    an automatic reactor scram. Such scenarios, referred to as anticipated
    transients without scram (ATWS), are analytically conservative and contri-
    bute to assuring a robust design.

    336                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    8.3 Loss-of-Coolant Accident
    The most important postulated accidents for a PWR is the loss-of-coolant
    accident (LOCA), which is often referred to as the “Maximum Hypothetical
    Accident”. It is characterized as a “decrease in primary system inventory”
    type of event. While it is an unlikely event, the importance of the LOCA
    for PWRs is that related analyses establish the required capabilities of the
    emergency core cooling system (ECCS). It (very often) sets the limiting
    heat generation rate of the nuclear reactor fuel rods and defines the pressure
    and temperature loads of the containment surrounding the RCS. Details
    regarding the assessment of containment loads and radiological releases
    following a LOCA are discussed in Chapters 11 and 12, respectively.
    As described in Chapter 1, in the United States the regulatory
    acceptance criteria for the design of an ECCS for LWRs are provided in
    10 CFR 50.46 and Appendix K, for all-sized breaks up to and including
    a double-ended break of the largest pipe in the RCS. The regulation
    emphasizes the protection of fuel and containment integrity through limits
    on fuel rod cladding temperatures, oxidation, hydrogen generation and
    geometry changes.

    8.3.1 Large-break LOCA
    The large-break LOCA is generically characterized as any rupture of the
    RCS large enough to cause a near complete evacuation of the water content
    of the reactor vessel, which are typically breaks larger than the largest
    attached pipe (i.e., pressurizer surge line), up to and including a double-
    ended guillotine break of the main coolant piping.

    8.3.1.1 Transient phases and identification
    A large-break LOCA in a PWR results in dramatic thermodynamic changes
    in both the RCS and containment, as large amounts of coolant mass
    and energy are transferred from the RCS to the containment. The large-
    break will result in rapid depressurization of the RCS with the nominally
    subcooled liquid coolant flashing to steam. Containment pressure and
    radiation levels may increase along with the detection of water in the
    containment sump. However, these changes in the containment can also
    be indicative of a loss of secondary coolant to the containment. Operators

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           337


    can often differentiate between a primary and a secondary loss of coolant
    to the containment based upon the SG pressures. For a primary LOCA,
    SG secondary pressure will not be rapidly decreasing or the SG(s) will not
    completely depressurized.
    The LOCA transient is often described as having several distinct
    phases, during which significantly different physical processes and
    phenomena influence event progression with respect to the figures-of-merit
    (e.g., peak clad temperature). Each of these transient phases are described in
    detail in the following sections, including a discussion of the most important
    physical phenomena and processes during each phase within the core,
    reactor vessel and RCS. Before addressing the details of each phase, it
    is useful to provide a brief high-level overview of a large-break loss of
    coolant scenario.
    The large-break LOCA scenario begins with the rupture of the main
    coolant piping. The RCS almost instantaneous drops in pressure from its
    normal operation pressure of about 2,250 psia (15.5 MPa) to the saturation
    pressure at the hot leg temperature, at which point the coolant in the RCS
    begins to flash to steam as shown in Figure 8.2. The flashing process slows
    the depressurization rate; however, it remains significant in magnitude.
    At this point, the depressurization rate is a balance between the rate at
    which coolant is able to exit the RCS to the containment through the break
    and the rate at which the coolant flashes to steam. The rate at which coolant

    Fig. 8.2. Large-break LOCA RCS pressure response.

    338                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    escapes through the break is governed by the critical (or choked) flow rate
    at the break. This portion of the transient is referred to as a Blowdown
    or Primary Blowdown if the rupture is large enough to have a separate
    Pressurizer Blowdown phase.
    The Primary Blowdown phase ends when the liquid content in the
    RCS is depleted or the RCS and containment have reached the pressure
    equilibrium. Depending on the size and design of the containment, this can
    be at or near atmospheric conditions. If the break size is large enough and
    the resulting primary system blowdown rapid enough, it is possible for the
    RCS to be at or near equilibrium with the containment before the pressurizer
    has completely emptied. When this occurs, the transient phase is called the
    Pressurizer Blowdown.
    During a pressurizer blowdown, the content of the pressurizer exits
    through the pressurizer surge line into the RCS hot leg. Depending on
    the reactor design and the break location, the pressurizer effluent could
    travel directly to the break location, bypassing the reactor core or it could
    travel through the reactor vessel or reactor core on its way to the break
    providing additional cooling. The pressurizer blowdown phase ends when
    the pressurizer pressure is at or near equilibrium with the remainder of the
    RCS. During the blowdown phase, the primary sources of makeup water to
    the RCS are passive safety systems such as accumulators.
    Following the blowdown phase, the transient enters the refill portion of
    the LOCA transient, characterized by the coolant injection via accumulators,
    and when applicable, pumped coolant safety systems. During refill, makeup
    water from the reactor ECCS partially fills the reactor vessel, including
    regions below the active fuel such as the lower plenum. In this phase,
    the fuel temperatures continue to rise due to fission product decay, heat
    generation and stored energy in the fuel pellets exceeding the available
    heat transfer to the remaining coolant. Because of the rising surface
    temperatures and the liquid deficient conditions in the reactor core region,
    the fuel surface temperatures can exceed the Leidenfrost Temperature
    (the minimum temperature at which film boiling can be sustained) and
    experience post-critical heat flux (CHF) heat transfer regimes. In such cases,
    convective steam cooling and radiative heat transfer from the fuel rods are
    the dominant heat transfer mechanisms, and the fuel heat up rates can be
    nearly adiabatic.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           339


    When makeup water from the ECCS reaches the bottom of the active
    fuel in the reactor core, the reflood phase of the LOCA begins. By this time,
    accumulator inventory has largely depleted and recovery is primarily from
    pumped coolant safety injection into the cold legs. As the water level in
    the reactor core rises, the location of the interface between effective heat
    transfer between the fuel and coolant below the liquid level and poor heat
    transfer above the liquid level is referred to as the quench front. The quench
    front is a chaotic region characterized by a frothing two-phase mixture,
    as the quenching process releases a large amount of energy to the water.
    This vigorous boiling at and below the quench front can entrain liquid
    drops into the steam, thus accelerating them upwards. These entrained
    drops can reduce the superheat in the steam above the quench front in
    what is often referred to as precursor cooling. Above the quench front
    location, post-CHF heat transfer occurs. Convective cooling by a mixture
    of steam with the entrained liquid droplets is a dominate heat transfer
    mechanism along with the momentary “dry” contact of entrained liquid
    droplets with the fuel rods in regions where continuous liquid contact with
    the fuel rods is prohibited as the minimum film boiling (or Leidenfrost)
    temperature has been exceeded. As the surface temperature falls below the
    Leidenfrost temperature, intermittent and then continuous liquid contact
    is permitted, and the available heat transfer rates increase as the surface
    quenches. Radiative heat transfer between the fuel rods and the cooler
    structural material, the steam and the entrained liquid droplets also provide
    for additional cooling above the quench front in the reflood stage. The
    duration of the reflood stage is dependent upon a number of factors including
    the break size, break location and ECCS fill capacity.
    The final stage of the LOCA transient is post-reflood heat removal,
    sometimes referred to as long term cooling. Upon quenching the core in
    the reflood stage, the focus becomes the continued removal of decay heat
    and the stored energy in the primary system, as the RCS is cooled to cold
    shutdown conditions. Due to the finite supply of ECCS water available
    to the RCS, long term cooling of the RCS following a LOCA typically
    consists of various stages of recirculation in which primary coolant and
    ECCS makeup water expelled out of the RCS into containment through the
    break is recirculated back through the primary RCS to remove additional
    energy from the RCS. The safety injection strategy often involves switching

    340                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    from the cold to the hot legs to prevent or mitigate the precipitation of soluble
    boron in the reactor core.

    8.3.1.2 Phenomenology assessment
    The phenomenology of the large-break LOCA has been extensively
    examined through several Phenomena Identification and Ranking Table
    (PIRT) programs. As discussed in Chapter 6, the identification and ranking
    effort acknowledges that there is a hierarchy and prioritization associated
    with physical phenomena and processes, and that this knowledge aids in
    the evaluation methodology development process. While the important
    phenomena and processes will vary between plant designs, available ECCS
    systems and accident scenarios, reviewing example applications can be
    informative.
    From [Shaw, 1988], for a PWR with cold leg ECCS injection, the
    important phenomena with respect to cladding temperature were evaluated
    for each large-break LOCA phase. For blowdown, the fuel rod stored
    energy, break flow and reactor coolant pump (RCP) degradation had the
    highest rank. During refill, the highest-ranked phenomena were cold leg
    and downcomer condensation (ECCS bypass related) and downcomer
    multi-dimensional flow. For reflood, the core reflood heat transfer, void
    generation, three-dimensional flow, entrainment and deentrainment in the
    upper plenum and hot legs, steam binding and the effect of non-condensible
    gases in the cold legs received the highest rating.
    In [Boyack, 2001], which addressed LOCA phenomenological
    importance specific to high burnup fuel integrity, the expert committee
    divided the phenomenological domain into seven subcategories reflecting
    different states of the core and fuel:

    (1) Initial conditions
    (2) Transient power distribution
    (3) Steady-state and transient cladding to coolant heat transfer (blowdown,
    refill, reflood) and core spray heat transfer
    (4) Transient coolant conditions as a function of elevation and time
    (5) Fuel rod response
    (6) Multiple rod mechanical effects, and
    (7) Multiple rod thermal effects

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           341


    As indicative of the above subcategories, the PIRT assessment involved
    a broader consideration of fuel failure mechanisms than just cladding
    temperature. However, cladding temperature is strongly correlated to
    broader figures-of-merit considered in the assessment in at least three of
    the subcategories. Within the subcategory of “steady-state and transient
    cladding to coolant heat transfer and core spray heat transfer”, film boiling,
    fuel rewet, rod-to-spacer grid thermal-hydraulic interaction and spacer grid
    rewetting, and droplet breakup were assessed as high-rank phenomena.
    The panel recognized that the complex processes of dryout, film boiling
    and rewetting are at once of great importance in determining cladding
    temperature, although they are fairly unknown because fundamental (i.e.,
    first principles) models do not exist and there is a large scatter in the data
    from experimental programs. Within the subcategory of “transient coolant
    conditions as a function of elevation and time”, fluid temperature, flow
    rate and direction, quality, void fraction and cross flow effects due to flow
    blockage were assessed as high-rank phenomena. Within the “Fuel rod
    response” subcategory, burst criteria, location of burst and time-dependent
    gap-size heat transfer were considered to have high importance.

    8.3.1.3 Mitigation strategies
    The ECCS is designed to provide cooling water to the reactor core and vessel
    to satisfy the regulatory requirements. The ECCS is usually comprised of
    several stages of safety water injection systems including accumulators,
    high-pressure safety injection and low-pressure safety injection.
    The accumulators are a passive system comprised of large tanks
    of water, typically around 15,000 gallons (∼57 m3 ), maintained at high
    pressure with a nitrogen overpressure. When the RCS pressure drops below
    the accumulator pressure, typically 700 psig (4.8 MPa), water is forced into
    the RCS by the nitrogen. The makeup capacity of the accumulators is small,
    but their passive nature provides some cooling capability while the active
    safety injection systems come online.
    The high- and low-pressure safety injection systems in existing plant
    designs are both active systems that require electrical power to operate,
    either through offsite power sources or emergency backup generators. Some
    modern plant designs (Generation III+), like the Westinghouse AP1000,
    incorporate passive systems for high- and low-pressure safety injection.

    342                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    High-pressure safety injection systems generally consist of high head,
    low volume pumped injection from cooling water storage tanks that exist
    within the containment. The blowdown rate during a large-break LOCA is
    generally rapid enough that the high-pressure safety injection system does
    not play a significant role in the recovery and mitigation of the transient.
    The low-pressure safety injection system consists of low head, high
    volume pumped injection from the cooling water storage tanks. The
    low-pressure safety injection systems are designed to have large enough
    capacity to provide cooling water to fill the reactor vessel and core that
    have been left completely voided following the blowdown. The location of
    the safety injection varies from plant to plant. Some plants inject only into
    the cold legs while some others inject into both the hot and cold legs, and
    other later designs provide injection directly within the reactor vessel.
    Advanced plant designs like Mitsubishi’s APWR and Westinghouse’s
    AP1000, include safety injection directly into the reactor vessel instead
    of into either the hot or cold legs of the RCS. Direct injection mitigates
    concerns related to injection water leaving the RCS through the break
    without providing any cooling benefit within the reactor vessel. Depending
    on the break location, coolant injected into the reactor vessel can bypass
    the reactor core region before being swept out from the break into the
    containment. Cooling water that bypasses the core can still provide some
    condensation cooling benefit before leaving the reactor vessel.

    8.3.1.4 Analysis considerations
    The analysis of a large-break LOCA requires a computer code or code suite
    capable of capturing the integrated, transient plant response. This includes
    all of the primary RCS, the heat transfer between the primary and secondary
    sides in the SGs, manual and automatic activation of safety systems and
    mitigation actions, and the mass and energy transfer between the break and
    containment. In addition to covering a wide range of system components,
    the analysis tool(s) must capture the integrated thermal-hydraulic response
    of the system over a wide range of plant states (i.e., pressures, mass fluxes,
    etc.) with varying phenomenological conditions that often change over
    very small timescales. Preferably, the analysis tool should also include
    models addressing the localized effects of spacer grids on the flow, the
    flow field and heat transfer. Specialized models for reflood phase, including

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           343


    models for quench front heat transfer and entrainment and for tracking
    the progression of the quench front are often required to account for these
    phenomena.
    LOCA analysis requires a thorough evaluation of the integrated effects
    of a break in the RCS that include break size, location, orientation and
    initial plant status in order to identify the limiting break scenario. The break
    size has a first-order effect on LOCA performance as it determines the
    depressurization rate and the total mass of RCS coolant expelled out the
    break, and the amount of water left in the RCS and the reactor vessel to
    provide cooling prior to ECCS activation.
    The break location also has a significant impact on the resulting LOCA
    transient. A break location in the cold leg versus a hot leg break in the
    RCS will determine the primary direction of flow during the blowdown
    phase, including the potential for flow stagnation in the core, and whether
    the primary coolant and ECCS travels through the core region to provide
    cooling, or if it is bypassed and flows out from the break prior to going
    through the core. Figure 8.3 illustrates this effect during the blowdown
    phase for a double-ended guillotine cold leg break. In this scenario, the
    accumulator injection in the affected loop exits the break directly with some

    Fig. 8.3. Cold leg double-ended guillotine break flow path.

    344                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    of the accumulator injection from the intact loop, bypassing the core and
    traversing around the periphery of the core barrel to exit the break.
    The physical elevation of the break location is also important as breaks
    located at higher elevations such as in the pressurizer surge line or at the
    loop high point can affect the transient fundamentally in terms of the ability
    to refill and reflood the core, than breaks at lower elevations such as in
    the RCP crossover leg piping between the SG and the RCP. Breaks at high
    elevations can also cause loop seals to form within the RCS, preventing the
    venting of steam from the reactor vessel. A more detailed description of the
    loop seal phenomena is presented in Section 8.3.2.1.
    The physical orientation and type of break also affects the RCS response
    to a LOCA. A double-ended guillotine break of the RCS piping allows for
    flow out from both sides of the break whereas a longitudinal split type
    break allows a fraction of the flow to bypass the break on the way to the
    core. Furthermore, the actual physical orientation on the piping affects the
    resulting discharge. A break on the bottom of a horizontal run of RCS piping
    allows more liquid (versus steam) water to escape the break and inhibits the
    establishment of a stratified liquid level in the piping. Conversely, a break at
    the top of a horizontal run of RCS piping allows more steam (versus liquid)
    to escape out of the RCS and could allow a stratified liquid level to form
    in the pipe. Alternatively, a side break on the RCS piping could allow both
    steam and water to escape the break dependent upon the liquid level in the
    associated piping.
    The safety injection path also needs to be considered. For plants with
    cold leg injection locations, safety injection water must flow down the
    downcomer and into the inlet plenum before being available to enter the
    core to provide cooling. Hot reactor structures such as the core barrel and
    reactor pressure vessel can heat the safety injection water to the boiling
    point. The resulting steam can then prohibit the flow of safety injection
    water down the downcomer region, thus inhibiting the effectiveness of the
    ECCS system.
    Analysis of the recirculation phase of a LOCA requires an evaluation of
    the ability of the safety injection pumps to pull suction on the containment
    sump that resides at the lowest elevation in the containment. In addition
    to nominal performance considerations, the performance of these pumps
    may be degraded by debris introduced into the safety injection system

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           345


    because of the LOCA. Specifically, during the energetic blowdown of a
    LOCA, numerous materials in the containment, such as piping insulation
    and paint may be swept to the bottom of the containment. These materials
    can accumulate and clog the intact region of the safety injection pumps,
    reducing the delivery of safety injection. There are additional concerns that
    there is a potential for small fragments to pass through the sump strainers
    and accumulate at the core entrance where they will block the recirculating
    flow, thus preventing sufficient cooling of the reactor [Rao et al., 2002].

    8.3.2 Small-break LOCA
    The small-break LOCA is defined as a break at or smaller than the largest
    attached piping and larger than the makeup capacity of the coolant charging
    system. A small-break LOCA may result from the actual failure of RCS
    piping or auxiliary systems; failures of valves or other components in the
    RCS can also result in a small-break LOCA. Such was the case in the failure
    of the power-operated relief valve on the pressurizer in the 1979 Three Mile
    Island Unit 2 accident.

    8.3.2.1 Transient phases and identification
    A small-break LOCA in the RCS to the containment can be challenging to
    identify depending upon the size of the break. Rapid depressurization of the
    RCS may not occur and increases in containment pressure or containment
    sump level may require an extended time to occur. However, the observance
    of abnormal containment radiation levels can be helpful in the identification
    of small-break LOCAs to the containment.
    In the event of a small-break LOCA, depending on the actual break
    size and location, some of the transient phases described for large-break
    LOCAs may not occur, or will significantly vary in severity or duration,
    and new transient phases may occur. Unlike a large-break LOCA, a small-
    break LOCA is not characterized by the rapid depressurization of the RCS.
    However, as RCS pressure decreases, a reactor trip is signaled along with
    the activation of the ECCS. The high-pressure safety injection pumps begin
    to supply water to the RCS; however, the injection flow rates can be very
    small due to the significant backpressure provided by the RCS. As pressure
    continues to decrease in the RCS due to the break, the subcooling initially

    346                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    present in the coolant is lost and the coolant in the pressurizer and throughout
    the RCS begins to flash to steam. The steam will continue to migrate to
    the higher portions of the RCS in the upper head and the SG. Despite the
    significant steam generated up to this point in the small-break LOCA, the
    RCS pressure still prevents activation of the low-pressure safety injection
    system or the passive accumulators.
    At this point in Westinghouse designed PWRs, the small-break LOCA
    enters the reflux condensation phase. During reflux condensation, steam
    generated in the reactor vessel travels into the SG U-tubes where it is
    condensed by transferring heat to the much cooler secondary side. The
    condensed liquid then forms liquid films on the periphery of the SG U-tubes
    where it can flow down both sides of the U-tube bundle, as shown in

    Fig. 8.4. Reflux condensation phase of a small-break LOCA.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           347


    Figure 8.4. Liquid returning back down the hot leg side of the SG can
    eventually return to the reactor core via the hot leg and outlet plenum,
    permitted the liquid flow is not precluded by the counter-current flow limit
    (CCFL) for the geometry and counter-current steam flow rate. The onset of
    flooding can result in intermittent liquid flow back to the outlet plenum.
    Potentially more problematic, the liquid that can fall down the cold side
    of the SG can build up and accumulate in the RCP crossover leg as shown
    in Figure 8.4. This buildup of a loop (or pump) seal prevents steam from
    flowing through the crossover leg and results in the pressurization of the
    outlet plenum as a result of the additional steam production. As the pressure
    increases, the water level in the reactor vessel can be depressed, resulting
    in the uncovering of the active fuel.
    The loop seal can continue to block steam flow until the pressurization
    in the reactor vessel can overcome the hydrostatic head of the loop seal and
    clear it from the crossover leg piping. As the RCS continues to depressurize,
    additional ECCS water added to the RCS can lead to the formation of
    additional loop seals and core uncovering. The presence of loop seals can
    be mitigated by the presence of engineered or fit-up leakage between the
    outlet plenum and downcomer, which allows steam to vent to the break
    without needing to clear the loop seal. However, the available leakage may
    not be sufficient to depressurize the outlet plenum and instead can act to
    delay loop seal clearance.

    8.3.2.2 Phenomenology assessment
    Two PIRTs have been published for small-break LOCAs in conventional
    PWRs. Bajorek [1999] considered a Westinghouse 4-loop PWR, and
    Ortiz and Ghan [1992] considered a Babcock & Wilcox (B&W) lowered
    loop PWR. For the Westinghouse PWR, the highly-ranked processes are
    summarized and grouped into these overall categories:

    Break flow, which includes the effects of the Upstream Flow Regime (i.e.,
    vapor pull-through, etc.), in addition to the break location and geometry of
    break (i.e., orifice or crack type geometry).

    Mixture level, which is a process accounted for by models and correlations
    for vertical interfacial drag and bubble rise. The mixture level also refers to

    348                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    the void distribution and phase separation processes that are important in
    several components of the RCS.

    Horizontal flow regime, which refers to processes that affect lateral flow.
    These processes are accounted for by models and input assumptions related
    to flow resistance in the horizontal components, flow regime predictions of
    horizontal stratification and CCFL, and the transition between horizontal
    flow regimes (especially stratified and slug).

    Loop seal clearance refers to those processes that occur in the loop seal
    piping during the brief period in which steam first passes through the loop
    seal(s) to the broken cold leg. While brief, the period has an important
    effect on the remainder of the transient. Highly-ranked processes include
    several interfacial processes in the horizontal segment of the loop seal such
    as stratification and drop entrainment, as well as the entrainment and CCFL
    that may occur in the vertical pump suction pipe.

    Fuel rod covers a number of processes that affect the fuel and cladding,
    including power, stored energy and clad to fluid heat transfer. Fuel power
    is characterized by power factors individually describing the local hot rod,
    hot assembly and variability in core-wide axial and radial power shapes.
    This category includes deep core uncovery and the possibility of runaway
    oxidation of Zr clad (i.e., metal-water reaction).

    SG hydraulics refers to several processes, the most important of which are
    the countercurrent flow in the SG tubes, condensation in the tubes during
    the periods when heat flows from the primary to the secondary and the
    overall resistance to the primary side flow through the SG. These processes,
    in turn affect reflux and core depression during the loop seal clearance
    period.

    Condensation refers to the interfacial heat and mass transfer at the surfaces
    between the subcooled liquid and saturated steam. This process is important
    in the cold leg and possibly the downcomer when stratification occurs. The
    low ranking early in the transient is due to the lack of significant liquid
    subcooling and stratification. Also of significant interest (but not highly
    ranked) is condensation to the safety injection liquid jet at the entry to the
    cold leg.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           349


    Ortiz and Ghan [1992] reported a PIRT for a small-break LOCA in a
    B&W “lowered loop” PWR. A unique feature of the B&W reactor vessel
    internals is the reactor vessel vent valves. These valves are hinged at the top
    and are held by gravity in the closed position during normal operation. The
    core barrel contains eight of these vent valves, which are situated around
    the perimeter of the core barrel in the upper part of the downcomer. During
    the B&W small-break LOCA, in which the break is assumed to be in the
    cold leg, these vent valves provide a path for steam flow from the upper
    plenum to the downcomer and then directly to the break.
    Phenomena were ranked according to their effect of peak cladding
    temperature and liquid inventory in the core. The small-break LOCA
    transient was divided into four distinct phases: blowdown phase, natural
    circulation phase, loss of natural circulation phase and the boiler-condenser
    phase. The most important phenomena during the blowdown phase are the
    break flow and the decay heat of the core. The most important phenomena
    during the natural circulation phase are the natural circulation in the vessel
    and the SG, the decay heat of the core, the break flow, the phase separation
    in the U-bend, the ECCS flow and the performance of the vent valves.
    During the loss of natural circulation phase, the important phenomena
    are the performance of the RCPs, which may be run momentarily in
    this phase, the ECCS flow and the break flow. Finally, during the boiler-
    condenser mode phase, the ECCS flow, the break flow and the heat transfer
    in the SG.

    8.3.2.3 Mitigation strategies
    For a small-break LOCA, the high-pressure safety injection system is
    typically the only safety injection system activated during the initial stages
    of the accident due to the elevated RCS pressure. The effectiveness of
    the high-pressure safety injection (HPSI) system in supplying emergency
    cooling water to the RCS depends upon several factors. The first is the RCS
    depressurization rate, which is a function of the break size and location.
    Second is the head capacity of the HPSI pumps. The amount of emergency
    cooling water that can be supplied to the core during the blowdown phase,
    when the RCS pressure is high, will be proportional to the available HPSI
    pump head capacity. The location of the HPSI relative to the break location
    is also a factor in the effectiveness of the safety injection system.

    350                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    Some modern plant designs have optimized their safety injection
    systems to mitigate large-break LOCAs. These systems rely on passive
    gravity driven or active low head pumped water injection. Low head
    systems are capable of providing high flow rates when the RCS is at
    low pressure. In order to mitigate small-break concerns, these plants
    include a depressurization system such as the multiple stage automated
    depressurization system (ADS) in the AP1000.

    8.3.2.4 Analysis considerations
    The analysis of a small-break LOCA requires a similar analysis tool as
    a large-break LOCA; however, the analysis tool must be able to predict
    several other physical phenomena unique to small breaks (particularly
    in Westinghouse PWR designs). The additional phenomena typically
    revolve around the complex flow topologies in the loops, such as reflux
    condensation, present in a small-break LOCA but typically absent in a large-
    break LOCA. This requires the ability to accurately capture the condensation
    of steam in the primary in the SG U-tubes and the ability to predict counter
    current flow in the SG and RCS piping along with the CCFL in the RCS
    geometry. The analysis tool must also be capable of predicting the formation
    and clearing of any potential loop seals that form in the RCS piping.
    As is done for large-break LOCA analysis, small-break LOCA
    analysis requires a thorough evaluation of potential break sizes, locations,
    orientations and initial plant status in order to determine the small break
    that truly challenges the safety systems of the plant. Due to the potential for
    loop seal formation, care should be taken to accurately model the true RCS
    piping volumes and elevations in the evaluation model, such that the correct
    volume of water can accumulate and the appropriate hydrostatic head be
    calculated.

    8.3.3 Intermediate break size considerations
    Intermediate breaks are not expected to be limiting events relative to the
    large- and small-break LOCAs. Given the large size distribution of this class
    of LOCAs, large uncertainties are attached to the dominant phenomena.
    Numerous factors such as plant configuration, ECCS capabilities, operator
    emergency response procedures, depressurization rates and the ability

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           351


    to manage the steam produced by the flashing coolant and decay heat
    loads all contribute to determining the most-limiting LOCA break size,
    location and orientation. In particular, the intermediate break size analyses
    need to consider the balance between the ECCS makeup capabilities
    as a function of the RCS pressure with the depressurization rate of
    the RCS.

    8.3.4 Transition break size considerations and identification
    In the late 2000s, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission proposed
    rulemaking to offer an alternative to the requirements in 10 CFR 50.46
    to analyze ECCS performance for breaks in the RCS up to and including
    a double-ended rupture of the largest pipe in the RCS. The proposed rule
    explored selecting a risk-informed transition break size (TBS) based upon
    pipe break frequencies caused by degradation mechanisms. RCS breaks
    with flow areas equivalent to a double-ended break of a pipe with a diameter
    of the TBS (or smaller) were to be considered design basis accidents and
    held to the ECCS requirements in 10 CFR 50.46. All breaks exceeding the
    TBS double-ended break area were to be considered beyond design-basis
    events and not subject to the requirements of 10 CFR 50.46. However, TBS
    identification and the proposed rulemaking were suspended in 2016 in favor
    of retaining the existing 10 CFR 50.46 ECCS requirements.

    8.3.5 Steam generator tube rupture
    The nominal SG tube rupture (SGTR) is a unique small-break LOCA
    scenario for a PWR in that the primary coolant is released to the secondary
    system instead of directly into the containment. Numerous SGTRs have
    occurred in operating PWRs. The causes of the various SGTRs have
    included stress corrosion cracking of the SG tubing, fretting, tube fouling,
    flow-induced vibration, tube sheet wear, poor secondary chemistry control
    and foreign objects left in the secondary following maintenance activities.
    In a SGTR the possibility exists for radioactive contaminates present in the
    primary coolant to bypass containment and be released to the environment
    through secondary side pressure relief and safety valves.
    The SGTR scenario begins with the postulated double-ended guillotine
    rupture of a single SG tube. The subsequent primary system response

    352                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    is similar to small-break LOCAs, as described in Section 8.3.2. Primary
    coolant flows through the ruptured SG tube and into the secondary side of
    the SG due to the pressure gradient between the primary and secondary of
    the RCS. If the break flow exceeds the primary side makeup flow capacity,
    the plant’s safety system will eventually respond with reactor and turbine
    trips, safety injection, normal feedwater isolation and actuation of auxiliary
    feedwater. Automatic steam dump to the condenser will actuate to dissipate
    energy transferred from the primary. The mass and energy flowing to the
    secondary side result in the filling of the effected SG.
    Once the tube failure has been identified, recovery actions begin by
    isolating steam flow from and terminating auxiliary feedwater flow to the
    affected SG. Subsequently, the RCS is cooled to less than saturation at the
    ruptured SG pressure by sustained steam dumping from only the intact SGs.
    This insures adequate subcooling in the RCS after depressurization to the
    ruptured SG pressure in subsequent actions. With offsite power available,
    the normal steam dump system to the condenser provides sufficient capacity
    to perform this cooldown rapidly. Once the primary system inventory and
    secondary side cooling are stabilized, safety injection can be stopped and
    primary-to-secondary leakage will cease.

    8.3.5.1 Transient identification
    The SGTR can be difficult to differentiate from other small-break LOCA
    scenarios. The loss of primary coolant inventory in a STGR results in
    a reduction in pressurizer level and corresponding drops in RCS and
    pressurizer pressure. Unlike a primary- or secondary-side LOCA to the
    containment, a STGR will not affect containment conditions. However,
    both abnormal secondary radiation levels and uncontrolled increases in SG
    water level can indicate a STGR with primary coolant escaping into the
    secondary. A mismatch between SG feedwater flow and its steam flow can
    sometimes be utilized to identify the SG with the faulted tube.

    8.3.5.2 Mitigation strategies
    Operator response to a STGR requires a significant effort early in the
    transient to limit the loss of primary coolant and prevent overfill of the
    affected SG. Following a SGTR, the reactor may trip because of low

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           353


    pressurizer pressure or from a turbine overload depending upon the size
    of the break. Safety injection systems may actuate based on low pressurizer
    pressure and low pressurizer level to provide makeup capability to the
    primary.
    Upon identification of a SGTR and the affected SG, the secondary
    side is isolated by securing feedwater flow to the generator and shutting
    the steam stop valve from the generator. Cooldown of the RCS via the
    unaffected SG(s) allows operators to depressurize the primary in an effort to
    match the ruptured SG pressure and stop the pressure-driven loss of primary
    coolant to the secondary side of the SG. The pressure equalization stops
    the filling and pressurization of the faulted SG. Operators work to achieve
    equalization prior to the affected SG pressure reaching the secondary safety
    relief and safety valve pressure setpoints to prevent the potential for a
    radioactive release.

    8.3.5.3 Analysis considerations
    The analysis of a SGTR transient requires an analysis tool that is capable
    of modeling both the primary and secondary sides of the RCS, similar to
    the analysis needs of a small-break LOCA. However, a SGTR may require
    a more detailed representation of the SG to capture the localized effects
    of the tube rupture in the generator, which is not typically needed for
    LOCA analysis. Additionally, the modeling of the secondary relief system
    is required in the event the relief valve pressure setpoints are reached. The
    ability to model operator actions is also important in the analysis of a SGTR,
    as this accident scenario requires significant operator intervention to stop
    the flow of primary RCS coolant to the secondary side.

    8.4 Anticipated Transients and Non-LOCA Accidents
    As with LOCA analysis, analysis of anticipated transients and non-LOCA
    accidents is performed to ensure that the integrity of the physical fission
    product barriers (fuel, reactor coolant system pressure boundary and
    the containment) are maintained by the evaluation of system and core
    conditions. As described in Chapter 3, the set of non-LOCA design-
    basis events is broadly defined based on potential equipment failures and
    malfunctions of the plant’s critical safety features. Assessment of these

    354                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    events provides assurance of the adequacy of the plant’s control and
    protection system, which safeguard the plant against events anticipated over
    its lifetime.
    While the intent of such analyses is the assessment of fission product
    barriers, regulatory requirements for the reliability of pressure vessels and
    boilers shift the safety goal emphasis of non-LOCA events to the evaluation
    of margins of specified acceptable fuel design limits (SAFDLs). The set of
    SAFDL figures-of-merit include the departure from nucleate boiling ratio
    (DNBR), fuel centerline temperature and core flow (i.e., hydrodynamic
    flow instability) and coolant enthalpy distribution. In contrast to LOCAs,
    satisfying the SAFDLs (i.e., acceptance criteria) means that the fuel fission-
    product barrier is preserved and that no radiological release occurs. PWR
    non-LOCA categories typically include the following: (1) increase or
    decrease in secondary heat removal from the reactor coolant system;
    (2) decrease of the flow rate for the reactor coolant system; (3) anomalies in
    reactivity and power distribution (see Chapter 10); (4) increase or decrease
    of the reactor coolant inventory; and (5) boron dilution (see Chapter 10).
    Greene et al. [2001] describe the development of a PIRT for
    conventional Westinghouse and Combustion Engineering PWRs. Since
    non-LOCA transients are typically less challenging and less complex
    events than the LOCA, the PIRT team chose to simplify the activity by
    not dividing the event domains into characteristic phenomenological time
    domains. Table 8.1 summarizes their results.
    Anticipated transients without scram (ATWS) are AOOs followed
    by a failure of the reactor control and protection system to provide an
    automatic scram or reactor trip when required. Failure of the reactor
    protection system to provide a scram when required could cause an
    otherwise minor event to turn into a high consequence accident. Because
    of the potential consequence of ATWS, regulations (10 CFR 50.62) require
    diverse, independent, reactor trip functionality. The ATWS rule is generally
    met by either demonstrating that the reactor protection system meets the
    diversity requirements or by providing a separate hardware backup scram
    system. For the protection system to fulfill the ATWS rule requirements, it
    must include a completely independent reactor scram function, including
    diversity in everything from sensors to final actuation of the scram. These
    are discussed in more detail in Chapter 10.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                                                                    355

    Table 8.1. PIRT summary for PWR non-LOCA transients (interpreted from [Greene
    et al., 2001]).
    RCS
    Flow
    Cooldown               Heat up                (-)               Vol+                   Vol−

    Transient/
    Accident
    Transient

    Transient

    Transient

    Transient
    Accident

    Accident

    Accident

    Accident
    SRP section
    Criteria challenged
    Core-DNBR                  •           •          •                       •                                  •
    Rod-FCM                                •
    Primary pressure                                  •           •           •           •           •
    SG pressure                                       •                                                                     •
    Enthalpy deposition
    Key phenomena
    Fuel rod HT                •           •          •                       •                                  •
    Kinetics feedback          •           •          •                       •
    Decay heat                                        •                                                                     •
    Pressurizer                •           •          •           •           •           •           •          •          •
    Flow coast down                        •          •                       •
    Boron tracking                         •
    SG pri./sec. HT            •           •          •                                                                     •
    SG secondary               •           •          •                                                                     •
    Critical flow                          •                                                                                •
    Containment pressure                   •
    Natural circulation                    •          •                                                                     •
    Core-loop mixing                       •          •

    8.4.1 Increases in secondary heat removal
    Overcooling transients result from an inadvertent increase in heat removal
    from the primary RCS to the secondary, resulting in a decrease in the core
    inlet temperature. The reduced core inlet temperature results in a positive
    reactivity insertion due to the negative temperature reactivity coefficient and
    potentially results in a power excursion if left unmitigated. Overcooling
    events consist of both AOOs and PAs depending upon the initiating
    event.
    For PWR analysis, it is important to note that the reactor behavior
    is dictated by the turbine, or more generally, by the steam flow or heat
    removed by the SGs. An increase in steam demand by the turbine will

    356                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    be automatically met by an increase in reactor power to establish a
    new steady-state condition unless reactor control or protection systems
    intervene. This is because an increase in steam flow or heat removal
    by the secondary system will reduce the RCS primary inlet temperature.
    Due to the negative temperature coefficient of reactivity this results in an
    increase in reactor power, which will increase the temperature rise across
    the core. This will continue until the temperature rise across the core is equal
    to the temperature reduction through the SG and reactor power stabilizes at
    the new steam power.
    Similarly, a reduction in steam demand by the turbine results in a
    reduction in heat removal from the primary coolant in the SG and an
    increase in core inlet temperature. The increased core inlet temperature
    will result in a reduced core power and reduced core temperature rise. This
    will continue until the temperature rise across the SG and core are balanced.

    8.4.1.1 Anticipated operational occurrences
    Several initiating events that result in an overcooling of the primary RCS
    are expected to occur with moderate frequency, such that they are classified
    as AOOs and require analysis. These include SG overfeed, a reduction
    in feedwater temperature, increased steam flow and SG depressurization.
    All of these events result in increased primary to secondary heat transfer
    through the SG to decrease the primary coolant temperature exiting
    the SG.
    The first such event is a secondary system failure which results in
    increased SG feedwater flow (overfeed). These failures result in additional
    SG secondary inventory with additional thermal mass that is able to remove
    more heat from the primary, resulting in a decrease in secondary side
    pressure. The associated pressure decrease in the saturated secondary side
    of the SG will cause the turbine control valve to open to maintain turbine
    load, leading to additional steam production to match the new feedwater flow
    rate. Automated reactor protection trips from a SG overfeed are dependent
    upon the initial operating conditions of the plant and how close operating
    parameters are to operational setpoints.
    An inadvertent decrease in the feedwater temperature is similar to the
    overfeed transient. This AOO can result from either the misoperation of the
    feedwater system or by the failure of a feedwater component or control

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           357


    system. With cooler water entering the SG, the temperature difference
    between the primary side RCS water and the water on the secondary
    side increases, resulting in increased heat transfer through the SG tubes.
    Similar to the overfeed transient, the increased heat transfer can lower the
    SG’s secondary side pressure and trigger a similar response by the turbine
    control valve to maintain turbine pressure. Depending upon the severity of
    the feedwater temperature decrease, the primary RCS pressure may also
    decrease.
    An unintended increase in steam demand also results in an overcooling
    AOO. This can be caused by either an inadvertent opening of the turbine
    control valve, a failure of the valve, or its associated control system.
    The increased steam flow will result in a depressurization of the SG’s
    secondary side, leading to additional steam production. To compensate
    for the additional steam production, feedwater flow will be increased to
    maintain the SG water level.
    Another AOO that can lead to an overcooling transient is the
    inadvertent depressurization of the secondary side of the SG. The
    depressurization can be caused by the accidental actuation or failure of a
    SG safety or relief valve. As a result of the decreasing secondary pressure,
    the saturation temperature of the secondary side drops, leading to increased
    steam production, initially by flashing of superheated water and followed
    by increased secondary side boiling.

    8.4.1.2 Main steam line break accident
    The main steam line break (MSLB) or steam line rupture (SLR) is a
    PA that results in an overcooling event. A MSLB is the hypothetical
    rupture of the main steam line either inside or outside of the containment.
    SLR is a more generic term for the rupture of a main steam line or
    any smaller connected steam piping. This failure can lead to a very
    rapid depressurization of the secondary side of the SG depending upon
    the rupture size, resulting in additional steam production with coincident
    flashing. Continued feeding of the affected SG — as the SG water level
    control system attempts to maintain the level — exacerbates the scenario
    by providing an additional source of cooling water. The corresponding drop
    in the secondary side’s temperature also increases the temperature difference
    between the primary and secondary, leading to increased heat transfer

    358                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    from the primary that results in cooler inlet temperatures. For large SLRs,
    like a MSLB, the resulting overcooling can lead to the depressurization
    of the primary RCS, thus leading to a decrease in the pressurizer water
    level.

    8.4.1.3 Mitigation strategies
    The mitigation of an overcooling event is dependent upon the severity
    of the overcooling. For AOO type events where the reactor is operating
    well within the operational setpoints, the overcooling will lead to a corres-
    ponding power increase. A new steady-state power is reached as the reactor
    remains within operational limits. For larger overcooling events or when
    the reactor is operating near the bounds of its operational space, the power
    increase will continue until the reactor protection system intervenes based
    upon high reactor flux (power), low pressurizer level or high SG secondary
    side water level.
    The response to a SLR requires more operator actions to recover the
    plant from the PA. A SLR can often be hard to differentiate initially from a
    LOCA, which also initiates with decreasing RCS pressure and pressurizer
    level following a reactor trip, potentially with increasing containment
    pressure if the SLR occurs between the SG and the main steam isolation
    valves (MSIV).
    Unlike a LOCA, a large SLR leads to the depressurization of the
    secondary side of the faulted SG, with the remaining SG maintaining
    secondary pressure and will not result in abnormal radiation levels on
    the secondary side. Upon diagnosis of a SLR rather than a LOCA, efforts are
    taken to identify the affected SG and isolate its secondary side. For a SLR
    outside of the containment, the SG can be isolated from the break location
    by closure of the MSIV. Following the termination of feedwater to the SG
    and closure of the SG blowdown lines, the depressurization of the SG can
    be stopped. When the break occurs between the SG and the MSIV, the SG
    cannot be isolated from the break location. In this instance, closure of the
    MSIV, termination of feedwater flow and closure of the blowdown lines
    isolate the secondary of the SG; however, the secondary depressurization
    will continue as the remaining secondary feedwater inventory is boiled
    off and the resulting steam is still able to escape out of the break to the
    containment.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           359


    8.4.1.4 Analysis considerations
    The analysis of an overcooling AOO or PA requires modeling of both the
    primary and secondary sides of the plant as well as the containment for a
    SLR. The level of detail required to model the SG response to a SLR can be
    significantly more compared to other AOOs or PAs. Additional detail may
    be required in both the primary and secondary side of the SG in the tube
    bundle region in order to capture the changes in primary-to-secondary heat
    transfer, as the water level on the secondary side of the tube bundle drops
    during SG blowdown and boil off. More accurate modeling of the steam
    separators may be needed to calculate the quality of the steam leaving the
    SG, which affects the critical flow rate at the break location and the resulting
    depressurization rate.
    The analysis tool must be able to mimic operator and reactor protection
    system actions based upon predicted plant indications. Accurate prediction
    of the mixing of RCS water in the core inlet plenum from the various
    cold legs is of particular importance, as the cold leg temperatures will
    be asymmetric and impact the neutronic condition of the reactor. The
    predicted increase in reactor power due to increased moderation in cooler
    primary RCS water is very sensitive to the accuracy of the applied reactor
    kinetics model. The effects of an overcooling transient can also be quite
    localized, depending upon the severity of the overcooling event and the
    amount of mixing available. This may require detailed nodalization of the
    core region in order to ensure thermal limits are not violated on a localized
    basis where local power can be increased to the neutronic feedback.


    8.4.2 Decreases in secondary heat transfer
    Transients that result in a decrease in secondary system heat transfer are
    referred to as undercooling events. These transients involve a decrease
    in heat removal from the primary system from one or more SGs. In the
    event of an undercooling transient, the reactor vessel inlet temperature
    will increase and pressurize the primary RCS. If the undercooling event
    continues, warmer inlet temperature will result in a negative reactivity
    insertion leading to a decrease in reactor power. The primary RCS pressure
    and pressurizer water level will recover as a result of the lower reactor
    power level. Similar to overcooling transients, undercooling events may

    360                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    be categorized as either an AOO or a PA based upon the initiating
    event.

    8.4.2.1 Anticipated operational occurrences
    A number of undercooling events are expected to occur with moderate
    frequency such that they are classified as AOOs and require analysis to
    ensure the reactor thermal limits are not exceeded. These include an increase
    in feedwater temperature, a decrease in feedwater flow, a load rejection, a
    turbine trip, a loss of condenser vacuum, inadvertent closure of the MSIV
    and a loss of feedwater flow.
    An increase in the temperature of feedwater supplied to the SG(s)
    will result in an undercooling event. This AOO can result from either
    the misoperation or failure of a feedwater component or control system.
    With warmer water entering the SG, the temperature difference between
    the primary side RCS water and the water on the secondary side decreases,
    resulting in decreased heat transfer through the SG tubes. The decreased
    heat transfer can increase the SG secondary side pressure and cause a
    closing of the turbine control valve to maintain turbine pressure. Depending
    upon the severity of the feedwater temperature increase, the primary RCS
    pressure may also increase.
    A decrease in feedwater flow to the SG(s) will also result in an
    undercooling event similar to an increase in feedwater temperature.
    Because of lower feedwater flow to the SG, secondary side inventory is
    decreased, thus allowing less heat to be removed from the primary, which
    in turn increases secondary side pressure. To maintain turbine load, the
    turbine control valve will close to reduce steam flow to match the lower
    feedwater flow rate. Automated reactor protection trips from an underfeed
    of a SG are dependent upon the initial operating conditions of the plant and
    how close operating parameters are to operational setpoints.
    The load rejection, turbine trip, loss of condenser vacuum and
    inadvertent closure of the MSIV all result in a decrease in steam flow
    from one or more SG. With the decreased steam flow, the SG secondary
    side will pressurize and cause the secondary side temperature to increase,
    which in turn decreases the temperature difference between the primary and
    secondary sides of the RCS along with the associated heat transfer.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           361


    In a load rejection event, the loss of an electrical connection to the grid
    causes an imbalance between the turbine and the generator. The turbine
    control valve reduces steam flow in an attempt to control turbine speed. The
    increasing secondary pressure leads to increasing primary RCS pressure. If
    left unmitigated, the increasing primary pressure will lead to a reactor trip
    based on high RCS pressure or high pressurizer level.
    For a turbine trip, the steam flow from all of the SGs ceases rapidly
    upon closure of the turbine isolation valve because of the trip, which can
    occur for a number of events. The quick isolation of the SGs relative to a load
    rejection retains more energy within the secondary side of the generators,
    thus resulting in higher secondary pressures and temperatures. If operator
    actions do not stop the secondary pressurization, the main steam or SG
    safety relief valves may cycle to decrease secondary pressure. Turbine
    bypass can provide some pressure relief by allowing the steam flow to
    pass directly into the condenser.
    A loss of condenser vacuum can be a more severe variant of a turbine
    trip. The loss of vacuum will cause a turbine trip and the quick isolation of
    the SGs. However, in this event, the condenser is no longer available as a
    heat sink whereas in a turbine trip the turbine bypass may provide relief.
    The pressurization of the secondary can lead to the cycling of the main
    steam or SG safety valves. Similarly, the pressurizer PORVs may open.
    To maintain both primary and secondary pressures below their operational
    limits.
    The inadvertent closure of a MSIV isolates a given SG from the
    turbine, thus resulting in pressurization of the generator. The slower stroke
    time of the MSIV versus the turbine isolation valve allows additional steam
    out of the SG, leading to a less severe pressurization of the secondary side
    relative to a turbine trip or loss of condenser vacuum. Closure of a single
    MSIV has significantly less impact on the primary RCS and the core as it
    only affects a single SG.
    A loss of feedwater flow is an AOO caused by the failure of a feedwater
    component, such as a valve or pump, or a control system. Upon the loss of
    feedwater the secondary SG water level decreases, resulting in decreased
    heat transfer through the SG tubes from the primary to the secondary,
    leading to decreased steam production. The SG secondary side pressure will

    362                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    decrease causing the turbine control valve to open in an effort to maintain
    steam pressure, which further lowers the affected SG(s) pressure and water
    level. The undercooling can increase RCS primary pressure to the point at
    which high RCS pressure will trip the reactor and turbine.

    8.4.2.2 Main feedwater line break accident
    A break in a SG(s) main feedwater line is a PA not expected to occur
    during the lifetime of the plant. In this scenario, a break or rupture of the
    SG feedwater piping occurs and can result in the loss of SG(s) secondary
    inventory for decay heat removal. This differs from a SLR as the secondary
    side water level can be quickly depleted before removing any heat from the
    primary side of the RCS.

    8.4.2.3 Mitigation strategies
    Similar to an overcooling event, the mitigation of the undercooling event is
    dependent upon the severity of the undercooling and the resulting increase
    in reactor inlet temperature. For AOO-type events like the increase in
    feedwater temperature or decrease of feedwater flow, the undercooling
    will result in a corresponding power decrease. A new, lower steady-state
    power is reached as long as the reactor remains within the permitted
    operational limits. For more severe undercooling events or when operating
    near the limits of the operational space, the reactor protection system will
    intervene.
    For AOOs such as a load rejection, turbine trip, MSIV closure or
    loss of condenser vacuum, the nuclear island becomes isolated in part
    or completely from its ultimate heat sink. The inability to remove heat
    from the secondary side will lead to increased RCS pressure. A reactor trip
    can be initiated based upon high RCS pressure or high pressurizer level if
    not already triggered by the reactor protection system upon a turbine trip.
    Following a reactor trip, decay heat removal must be provided.
    The response to a feedwater line break PA is more involved than
    that required by undercooling AOOs based upon both the severity of the
    undercooling and the reduced time scale in which it occurs. A break in a
    feedwater system will depressurize the secondary side of the SG(s) and can
    quickly deplete the liquid inventory on the secondary side of the SG(s) as

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           363


    it flashes to steam. The rapid loss of secondary side heat transfer through
    the affected SG(s) results in both increasing RCS pressure and temperature.
    A reactor trip can be triggered based on low SG secondary side pressure,
    high RCS pressure or high pressurizer level. Due to the rapid nature of this
    PA, the increasing RCS pressures may result in actuation of the pressurizer
    PORV or safety relief valves. Operator action is needed to provide decay
    heat removal capability through the functional SG(s) and safety-grade decay
    heat removal systems.

    8.4.2.4 Analysis considerations
    Depending on the severity of the undercooling transient, the warmer primary
    coolant can propagate through the core before the reduction in reactor power
    has affected the heat flux at the rod surface due to the large thermal time
    constants of the fuel rods. In this scenario, the resulting heat transfer from
    the fuel rods to the coolant is decreased because of a smaller temperature
    difference, potentially leading to challenging DNBR or fuel thermal
    limits.
    The analysis of an undercooling AOO or PA requires accurate
    modeling of both the primary and secondary sides of the plant as well
    as the containment for a feedwater line break. The ability to model operator
    and reactor protection system actions is also needed to accurately determine
    how much energy has been transferred prior to complete or partial isolation
    from the ultimate heat sink. Consideration must also be given to break
    locations for the analysis of a feedwater line break. For breaks outside
    of the feedwater isolation valves, isolation of the SG(s) can be achieved
    to preserve secondary inventory; however, breaks inside of the isolation
    valves do not allow for isolation and will result in depletion of the secondary
    inventory. Feedwater breaks in locations that affect multiple SGs should also
    be considered such that the most challenging scenario is utilized to ensure
    reactor protection.

    8.4.3 Decrease in reactor coolant flow rate transients
    This AOO is characterized by a reduction in the flow rate of primary RCS
    coolant through the reactor core. Several initiating events can lead to either
    partial or complete loss of pumped primary flow. A partial loss of flow

    364                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    (PLOF) results from the failure of one or more RCPs, while a complete
    loss of flow (CLOF) results from the loss of all RCPs. In addition to the
    PLOF and CLOF, decreases in reactor flow are postulated to occur because
    of pump seizures and pump shaft breakage, both of which are PAs. Failures
    related to pump flow controllers are generally not considered for PWRs
    unless these components are present.
    During a loss of flow event, the core flow rate decreases. The reduced
    primary system flow rate degrades core heat transfer, resulting in increased
    primary system temperatures, which further degrades core heat transfer.
    Core thermal limits, particularly the DNBR, can be challenged in the first
    few seconds of the transient, before the protection system provides a reactor
    trip. The severity of the PLOF or CLOF depends on the time scale of the
    reduction in core flow rate, compared to the ability of the protection system
    to detect the occurrence of flow rate reduction and to provide protective
    action.

    8.4.3.1 Anticipated operational occurrences
    PLOF transients can be caused by mechanical or electrical failures of the
    RCP motors or power supply. A CLOF transient may be a result of the loss
    of electric power to all of the pumps simultaneously or because of a loss of
    offsite power.
    Immediately following the initiation of a PLOF, the loop flow rate in
    the affected loop or loops drops significantly as the pump coasts down
    under its own inertia. Eventually, flow in these loops will reverse due to
    the presence of operating pumps in the unaffected loops. The flow rate
    in the unaffected loops will increase due to the reduced total system loss,
    partially compensating for the pumps that have stopped. The effectiveness
    of the operating pumps in providing flow through the core is reduced by
    the reverse flow in the affected loop(s). As the core flow decreases, the
    temperature rise required to remove the heat produced in the core increases
    the primary system temperature. The imbalanced loop flow that results
    from a PLOF can lead to asymmetric conditions in the core, which can
    further challenge thermal limits. When the loop flow rate reaches the low
    flow setpoint a reactor trip will be initiated. The flow coast down to the trip
    setpoint for a PLOF can be up to about 10 seconds depending on the pump
    design (moment of inertia) and the number of pumps affected.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           365


    During a CLOF, all of the pumps are assumed to trip simultaneously
    and the total system flow decreases rapidly as all of the previously operating
    pumps coast down under their inertia. Following a CLOF, the low flow trip
    setpoint can be reached in less than 5 seconds. Depending on the design of
    the pump and the protection system, either a PLOF or a CLOF can be the
    more limiting AOO scenario.

    8.4.3.2 Postulated accidents
    Pump shaft seizure and pump shaft break are not expected to occur during
    the life of a PWR and so are considered postulated accidents. In the
    former, the pump shaft instantaneously seizes, causing a transient like the
    PLOF for a single pump but with no pump coast down. The seized shaft
    provides significantly more resistance to reverse flow than in the PLOF
    AOO scenario, which results in more of the unaffected loop flow passing
    through the core. The rapid reduction in loop flow during a pump seizure
    leads to a reactor trip due to a low loop flow rate.
    In the pump shaft break PA, it is assumed that the pump impeller
    connection with the pump motor is severed by mechanical failure of the
    shaft itself. With the loss of the pump shaft, rotor and flywheel, pump inertia
    is degraded and the pump coast down is much more rapid than in during a
    PLOF. Since the pump impeller can still spin (unlike in a pump seizure), the
    pump shaft break accident can allow more reverse flow through the affected
    loop than either the pump seizure or the PLOF, which reduces the amount
    of system flow available to provide core cooling. Because of these factors
    the pump shaft break can be more limiting for core thermal performance
    than the pump shaft seizure.

    8.4.3.3 Mitigation strategies
    The decrease in reactor flow rate can lead to a reactor trip, eliminating
    fission power. To provide adequate core cooling during a PLOF or CLOF,
    the pumps are fitted with flywheels to increase the moment of inertia of the
    pump in order to prolong the pump coast down. To reduce the probability
    of a CLOF, independent power supplies are provided for each pump
    motor.

    366                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    8.4.3.4 Analysis considerations
    Many of the analysis considerations discussed for modeling of the primary
    RCS for under and overcooling transients also apply for decrease in core
    flow transients. The imbalanced loop flow that results from a PLOF can
    lead to asymmetric conditions in the core, depending on mixing in the inlet
    plenum. It may be important to develop an evaluation model that is capable
    of reproducing this behavior if the reactor trips and reactivity feedback do
    not shut down heat production in the low flow regions of the core before the
    rod surface heat flux becomes imbalanced with the available coolant flow,
    and fuel rod thermal limits can be challenged.

    8.4.4 Increases in primary coolant inventory
    An increase in the primary RCS coolant inventory is an AOO that is
    expected to occur in a PWR with moderate frequency. Numerous safety
    and auxiliary systems are connected to the RCS with piping of various sizes
    with the ability to inject additional water. Inadvertent operation of any of the
    systems results in an inadvertent increase in the primary coolant inventory.
    The coolant addition results in an increase in the pressurizer level. This,
    in turn, reduces the available steam space and increases the RCS pressure.
    Dependent upon the operating conditions, the pressurizer spray may actuate
    to reduce RCS pressure. If the primary RCS inventory continues, the reactor
    can trip based on the high primary pressure or high pressurizer level.
    In addition to the increase in primary pressure and inventory,
    consideration needs to be given to the fact that the injected coolant is cold
    relative to the RCS coolant. The resulting decrease in coolant temperature
    leads to an increase in reactor power due to the negative temperature
    coefficient. A reactor trip based on high reactor power (flux) can also occur
    if a trip based on the high RCS pressure or high pressurizer level does not
    occur.

    8.4.4.1 Mitigation strategies
    This AOO is terminated by securing the coolant flow from the system
    providing the inadvertent coolant injection. A reactor trip from a high
    pressurizer level, high RCS pressure or high reactor power will typically
    prevent thermal limits from being exceeded during the transient. However,

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                           367


    if the flow of additional coolant is not secured, the operators risk taking the
    RCS “solid” by losing the steam bubble in the pressurizer, which would
    result in a loss of RCS pressure control.

    8.4.4.2 Analysis considerations
    The analysis of this transient requires examinations of all of the potential
    sources of additional primary coolant in the reactor design of interest.
    The chemical volume control system (CVCS) and ECCS are two potential
    systems of interest for this AOO. The makeup capability of the CVCS at
    operating pressure can inject additional coolant, although it is typically at a
    degraded flow rate due to the reactor backpressure and size of the associated
    piping. Inadvertently leaving the makeup (or charging) pumps on can lead
    to this AOO.
    The ECCS can also be the source of the additional coolant. Inadvertent
    actuation of the ECCS can inject additional coolant via the high-pressure
    safety injection pumps; however, activation of the ECCS is accompanied
    by a reactor trip that negates the potential increase in reactor power caused
    by increased moderation from the colder coolant. During a post-reactor
    trip cooldown or in preparation to entering cold shutdown conditions for
    refueling or maintenance, the ECCS accumulators must be secured prior to
    the RCS pressure falling below the accumulator pressure. Failure to do so
    will result in the injection of accumulator water into the RCS. The reactor
    is already shutdown at this point so no power excursion is to be expected;
    however, care must be taken to secure the accumulators in operational
    procedures.
    Analysis of this AOO requires an analysis tool capable of modeling the
    RCS response to an additional coolant inventory. The ability to accurately
    model the positive neutronic feedback is required to ensure that the DNBR
    limits are not violated. Due to the potential localized effects of this AOO,
    detailed neutronic and thermal evaluations may be required.

    8.4.5 Station Blackout
    The Station Blackout (SBO) is a beyond design-basis event that receives
    unique regulatory considerations by many national nuclear safety agencies.
    It involves the complete loss of all alternating current (AC) power (i.e., from

    368                    DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    both offsite and emergency onsite sources). Without power, all safety and
    non-safety grade equipment at the nuclear power plant are non-functional.
    Initial plant response resembles a loss-of-flow event (see Section 8.4.3), as
    the RCPs power down and a natural circulation sets up between the core and
    SGs. Long-term plant response depends on the length of time that active
    safety systems remain unavailable.
    Because most safety systems rely on AC power for essential functions,
    the potential consequences of an SBO can be severe as illustrated by
    the events that occurred at the Fukushima Daiichi Nuclear Power Plant
    following the 2011 Great East Japan Earthquake and resulting tsunami.
    The SBO event and design considerations for mitigating such an event are
    provided in the 10 CFR 50.63 and Regulatory Guide 1.155.

    8.4.5.1 Mitigation strategies
    Following a SBO event, both the reactor and turbine are tripped either
    automatically or manually. At this point, the RCS coolant inventory is
    maintained by isolating any flowpath out of the RCS. The availability of
    air-operated valves in some plant designs allows operators to isolate flow
    paths and aids in maintaining the RCS inventory in the absence of AC
    power. To ensure proper decay heat removal capacity, some plants include
    steam driven, auxiliary feedwater pumps to maintain SG secondary water
    levels. At this point, emergency response efforts focus on restoring AC
    power to active safety systems by starting an emergency diesel generator.
    Depending upon the period of time without AC power, decay heat removal
    can be accomplished via the SGs.

    8.4.5.2 Analysis considerations
    The severity of a SBO will depend on both the duration of the loss of
    electrical power as well as the integrity of the RCP seals. The loss of seal
    injection flow results in leakage of the RCS coolant along the RCP shafts.
    If the leaking coolant cannot be replaced, a loss of reactor coolant will be
    sustained. In addition to the loss of seal injection flow, the loss of electrical
    power can challenge the thermal integrity of the RCP seals due to a loss of
    seal cooling.

    PWR LOCA/Non-LOCA Design-Basis Events                                369


    References
    Boyack, B. E., Motta, A. T., Peddicord, K. L., Alexander, C. A., Andersen, J. G. M., Blaisdell,
    J. A., Dunn, B. M., Ebeling-Koning, D., Fuketa, T., Hache, G., Hochreiter, L. E., Jensen,
    S. E., Langenbuch, S., Moody, F. J., Nissley, M. E., Ohkawa, K., Potts, G., Rashid, J.,
    Rohrer, R. J., Tulenko, J. S., Valtonen, K., Waeckel, N. and Wiesenack, W. (2001).
    Phenomenon identification and ranking tables (PIRTs) for loss-of-coolant accidents in
    pressurized and boiling water reactors containing high burnup fuel, NUREG/CR-6744,
    LA-UR-00-5079, Los Alamos National Laboratory.
    Boyack, B. E., Duffey, R., Griffith, P., Lellouche, G., Levy, S., Rohatgi, U., Wilson, G.,
    Wulff, W., Zuber, N., Katsma, K. R., Hall, D. G., Shaw, R. A., Fletcher, C. D.
    and Boodry, K. S. (1989). Quantifying reactor safety margins, NUREG/CR-5249,
    EGG-2552, Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.
    Bajorek, S. M., Ginsberg, A., Shimeck, D., Ohkawa K., Young, M., Hochreiter, L.,
    Griffith, P., Hassan, Y., Fernandez, T. and Speyer, D. (1999). Small-break
    loss of coolant accident phenomena identification and ranking table (PIRT) for
    Westinghouse pressurized water reactors, Proc. 9th International Topical Meeting on
    Nuclear Reactor Thermal Hydraulics, NURETH-9, San Francisco, CA, USA.
    Greene, K. R. (2001). Utilizing elements of the CSAU Phenomena Identification and
    Ranking Table (PIRT) to qualify a PWR non-LOCA transients system code, Proc.
    9th International Conference on Nuclear Engineering, ICONE-9, Nice, France.
    Ortiz, M. G. and Ghan, L. S. (1992). Uncertainty analysis of minimum vessel liquid
    inventory during a small-break LOCA in a B&W plant — An application of the
    CSAU methodology using the RELAP5/MOD3 computer code, NUREG/CR-5818,
    EGG-2665, Idaho National Engineering Laboratory.
    Rao, D. V., Letellier, B. C., Shaffer, C., Ashbaugh, S. and Bartlein, L. S. (2002).
    GSI-191 Technical Assessment, Volumes 1–4, NUREG/CR-6762, LA-UR-01-4083,
    Los Alamos National Laboratory.
    Shaw, R. A., Rouhani, S. Z, Larson, T. K. and Dimenna, R. A. (1988). Development of
    an identification and ranking table for thermal-hydraulic phenomena during a PWR
    large-break LOCA, NUREG/CR-5047, EG&G-2527, Idaho National Engineering
    Laboratory.

=== Chapter 10 — LWR Reactivity Transients and Accidents (M. Avramova, K.N. Ivanov) ===
10.1 Introduction
    Light-water reactors (LWRs) are power reactors in which ordinary water
    (H2 O) serves both as a moderator and as a coolant. There are three major
    types of LWRs: pressurized water reactors (Chapter 8), boiling water
    reactors (Chapter 9) and the Russian-designed VVERs.a
    Reactivity transients and accidents in LWRs, which include the
    so-called reactivity initiated (insertion) accidents (RIAs), are nuclear reactor
    accidents that involve positive reactivity insertion in the reactor core,
    thereby causing a power excursion and corresponding temperature increase
    locally or globally. Some of these events are classified as design-basis
    events (DBEs) and others as beyond-DBEs (including anticipated transients
    without scram (ATWS)). These postulated scenarios for RIAs focus on
    several events, which result in reactivity excursions and therefore might
    become critical to fuel integrity. The initiators of reactivity transients and
    accidents (as consequences of different initiating events) are different,
    ranging from inadvertent removal of control element from a reactor core
    with varying velocities, introduction of diluted soluble boron coolant slugs

    a “Veda-Vodyanoi Energetichesky Reaktor”, meaning water-cooled power reactor.

    411

    412                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    in pressurized water reactors (PWRs) and VVER cores, introduction of
    colder water coolant in parts of the PWR/VVER cores, change in pressure
    and void fraction in boiling water reactor (BWR) cores, etc.

    10.1.1 Background
    The safety evaluation of a nuclear power plant (NPP) includes analyses of
    the plant’s responses to postulated disturbances in process variables and
    postulated equipment failures or malfunctions. A RIA is a nuclear reactor
    accident that involves an unwanted increase in fission rate and reactor
    power. Significant power increases may damage the core and in some severe
    cases lead to partial destruction of the reactor. Some scenarios of RIAs are
    identified by regulatory bodies as design-basis accidents (DBAs).
    First, we will discuss the basic reactor dynamics as applied to RIAs
    in LWRs. Any reactivity change in a reactor core is driven by changes
    in the external reactivity (caused by reactivity control systems and by
    fuel assemblies displacements), or by changes in the feedback reactivity.
    There are two major feedback mechanisms in LWRs — fuel temperature
    (Doppler) feedback and moderator density feedback. The moderator density
    feedback or moderator feedback acts as a moderator temperature feedback
    in PWRs and VVERs, and in BWRs, it acts as a void feedback. In LWRs,
    the Doppler feedback is always negative and acts promptly (with about
    10−15 seconds delay after a power increase), where the moderator feedback
    could be negative or positive and acts with a delay of 3–4 seconds, which is
    approximately equal to the characteristic time constant of heat transfer from
    the fuel to the coolant/moderator. Positive reactivity insertions in reactivity
    transients and accidents vary by the amount of inserted reactivity and the
    rate (speed) of reactivity insertion. If the inserted reactivity is larger than the
    effective delayed neutron fraction, the RIA is called super-prompt critical,
    and if it is less, it is called sub-prompt critical.
    There are different classifications of reactivity transients and accidents,
    and we will be using the following in which the RIAs in power reactors can
    be divided broadly into [Committee of the Safety of Nuclear Installations,
    2010; International Atomic Energy Agency, 1993]:

    (a) Control system failures;
    (b) Control element ejections and uncontrolled withdrawal;

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       413


    (c) Events caused by coolant/moderator temperature and void effects; and
    (d) Events caused by dilution or removal of coolant/moderator poison.

    LWRs use control elements (control rods) for power control, power
    shaping and shutdown. Control rods contain one or several highly
    neutron-absorbing material. Inadvertent withdrawal of these rods, either
    due to control system faults or operator error, is a possible cause for
    RIAs. Reactor control systems generally place constraints on allowable
    control rod movements. Further protection is provided by imposing rod
    insertion limits (RILs), which restrict the reactivity worth of each step of
    the control element movement. RILs ensure that the reactivity addition in
    a potential inadvertent control rod withdrawal (CRW) is manageable. The
    CRW reactivity insertion rate corresponds to the working speed (velocity)
    of the movement of control rods, i.e., approximately 2 cm/second. The
    reactivity events involving control rod withdrawal are classified as reacti-
    vity transients, not accidents.
    Control rod ejection accidents (REAs) in PWRs and VVERs, and
    control rod drop accidents (CRDAs) in BWRs, occur by mechanical failure
    of the control rod driving mechanism or its housing. Since the reactivity
    insertion rates and the resulting power transients are much larger than
    during the CRWs, these events are classified as DBAs for LWRs. This
    means that they are postulated accidents with low probability that are used
    to establish the design-basis of LWRs and to define safety limits for their
    operation.
    Inadvertent changes in coolant/moderator temperature and/or void
    fraction may add reactivity to the core. PWRs are generally operated with
    a negative moderator temperature coefficient, although the coefficient may
    turn positive in cases where the coolant is strongly borated and is at low
    temperature. Except for these cases, reactivity can be inserted by a decrease
    in coolant/moderator temperature. Possible scenarios for such events are
    the start up of an inactive reactor coolant pump in an idle steam generator
    loop, or sudden increase in heat removal by a postulated event such as
    the secondary side main steam line break (MSLB). Events such as the
    MSLB are classified as accidents while events that lead to relatively slow
    additions of reactivity, in most cases, are classified as transients. BWRs
    are operated with negative reactivity feedback from moderator temperature

    414                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    and void fraction. Possible scenarios for reactivity insertion events in
    BWRs include loss of feedwater heating (leading to coolant temperature
    reduction), accidental operation of emergency core cooling systems or
    various over-pressurization transients, resulting in void collapse such as
    turbine trip (TT) transients.
    LWRs use soluble boron in the coolant moderator/coolant also as a
    safety shutdown mechanism. Once the safety system is actuated, positive
    reactivity may be inadvertently added if the borated water is diluted with un-
    borated or less borated water. PWRs also use soluble boron in the primary
    coolant system as a means for reactivity control under normal reactor
    operation. Inadvertently, dilute water could be introduced into the reactor
    core for different reasons, leading to reactivity addition in a PWR core.
    These events are called boron dilution transients (BDTs).

    10.1.2 Consequences
    The intermediate consequence of RIAs is a fast rise of power and fuel
    temperatures. The power excursion may lead to failure of fuel rods and
    release of radioactive material into the primary reactor coolant. The damage
    mechanisms are all related to high temperature and the degree of fuel
    damage correlates well with the peak value of fuel pellet specific enthalpy —
    the higher the enthalpy, the more extensive the damage. Cladding failure
    may occur at lower fuel enthalpies at increased levels of fuel burnup. The
    nuclear industry has traditionally used a value of 170 cal/g for the total
    enthalpy to indicate the level at which cladding failure will occur because
    of overheating. To distinguish between peak and average fuel enthalpy
    deposited during overheating events, the safety limit for both fresh and
    low-burnup fuel could have been set at about 230 cal/g rather than the
    280 cal/g limit that the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) has
    adopted, because of the confusion between total energy deposition and
    peak fuel enthalpy (i.e., some energy is lost in the transient event in the
    first 10 milliseconds).

    10.1.3 Regulatory basis
    RIAs are important postulated accidents factored in the design of LWRs.
    Requirements to mitigate the consequences of a RIA are specified within

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       415


    the regulations used to license and operate LWRs. General Design Criteria
    28 specified in the 10 CFR 50 Appendix A by the U.S. NRC requires that
    the amount of reactivity that is allowed to be inserted during an accident be
    limited to assure the integrity of the reactor pressure vessel and a coolable
    reactor core geometry. Furthermore, the number of fuel rods that experience
    cladding breach and the release of fission products into the primary coolant
    must be estimated in order to demonstrate that the offsite radiological dose
    consequences of the event remain well within the guidelines of 10 CFR
    Part 100.
    A synopsis of the evolution of fuel safety criteria is given in [Working
    Group on Fuel Safety, 2012] where the chronology of the limit evolution is
    presented in a condensed manner starting from the original U.S. Regulatory
    Guide 1.77 [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 1974]. In the United
    States and other countries, the acceptance criteria for vessel and cladding
    integrity employed in the accident analysis of LWR RIA events traditionally
    consisted of two separate criteria: an upper limit to ensure reactor vessel/
    core integrity and a lower failure threshold for use in estimating the dose
    consequences. Section 4.2 of the NUREG-0800 — Standard Review Plan
    (SRP) [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, 2007] for the review of
    Safety Analysis Reports (SARs) for NPPs specifies two licensing criteria
    applicable to LWR (both BWR and PWR) RIA events: a fuel coolability
    limit and a fuel rod failure threshold. For the fuel coolability limit, a
    maximum radially averaged peak fuel enthalpy (RAPFE) of 280 cal/g had
    been established to restrict the amount of energy deposition into the fuel rod
    during a RIA event, as a means to preclude fuel melting, fragmentation and
    dispersal into the coolant. Such conditions could result in the generation
    of mechanical energy, which if sufficiently large, could compromise the
    integrity of the reactor vessel. Tests such as the PBF-RIA (Power Burst
    Facility at the Idaho National Laboratory) indicated that the 280-cal/g limit
    was too conservative. Thus, lower values were established, for example,
    200 cal/g based on French CABRI tests (Cadarache, France).
    To meet the requirements of fission product release during a postulated
    fast accident such as a RIA, fuel rod failure was defined as an incident
    for those rods that exceed the critical departure from the nucleate boiling
    ratio (DNBR) for PWRs and critical power ratio (CPR) for BWRs. A lower
    limit than the traditional 280 cal/g was deemed appropriate, because fast

    416                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    reactivity insertion events do not allow sufficient time for heat removal
    from the fuel. For BWRs at zero or low power, a radially averaged peak fuel
    enthalpy of 170 cal/g is assumed to result in fuel failure. In most instances,
    the traditional fuel rod integrity acceptance criteria for RIA events were
    based on RIA-simulation experiments performed on rods with zero or low
    burnup levels and were assumed to be burnup independent. In summary, a
    limit on the radially averaged peak fuel enthalpy of 280 cal/g is used for the
    fuel coolablity criterion. The fuel rod failure threshold was established to
    meet the requirements of fission product release during postulated accidents.
    The fuel rod failure threshold for PWRs is DNB and 170 cal/g for BWRs
    under RIA at low power and hot zero power (HZP) conditions.
    The results from RIA-simulation experiments performed since 1993
    to evaluate the transient behavior of high burnup fuel have shown that
    the original fuel rod integrity acceptance criteria defined in NUREG-0800
    may be insufficient to ensure compliance with General Design Criteria
    28 or 10 CFR 100 requirements beyond a certain level of burnup for
    some postulated RIAs. In response to these observations, Section 4.2
    of the NUREG-0800 Standard Review Plan [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2007] was amended to include interim guidance for RIA
    events: Appendix B, Interim Acceptance Criteria and Guidance for the RIA.
    Reactor design calculations employing NRC-approved neutron kine-
    tics, thermal-hydraulic and heat transfer analysis methods are used to
    demonstrate compliance to these acceptance criteria for RIA events.


    10.1.4 Regulatory acceptance criteria
    Regulatory authorities define acceptance criteria for RIAs to ensure integrity
    of reactor coolant pressure boundary and to maintain core coolability
    during accidents. These criteria form the design basis for reactivity control
    systems and define safety limits that must not be transgressed under reactor
    operation. Some fuel damage is generally tolerated, and the acceptable
    amount of damage is settled by the requirements to meet regulatory limits
    on the radiation dose to the public, and to ensure integrity of the coolant
    pressure boundary and long-term core coolability. The enthalpy thresholds
    for fuel rod failure are often supplemented with acceptance criteria for other
    parameters of importance to cladding failure.

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       417


    The total number of fuel rods that must be considered in the radiological
    assessment is equal to the sum of all fuel rods failing at least one of the
    criteria below:

    (1) The high cladding temperature failure criteria for zero power conditions
    is a peak radially averaged fuel enthalpy greater than 170 cal/g for fuel
    rods with an internal rod pressure at or below system pressure and
    150 cal/g for fuel rods with an internal rod pressure exceeding system
    pressure. For intermediate (greater than 5% rated thermal power) and
    full power conditions, fuel cladding failure is presumed if local heat
    flux exceeds thermal design limits (e.g., DNBR and CPR).
    (2) The interim pellet-cladding mechanical interaction (PCMI) failure
    criterion is defined as the radially averaged fuel enthalpy exceeding
    the corrosion-dependent limit. Fuel cladding failure may occur instan-
    taneously during the prompt fuel enthalpy rise (due to PCMI) or may
    occur as total fuel enthalpy (prompt + delayed), heat flux and cladding
    temperature increase. For the purpose of calculating fuel enthalpy for
    assessing PCMI failures, the prompt fuel enthalpy rise is defined as
    the radially averaged fuel enthalpy rise at the time corresponding to
    one pulse width after the peak of the prompt pulse. For assessing high
    cladding temperature failures, the total radially averaged fuel enthalpy
    (prompt + delayed) should be used.

    The acceptance criteria are based on the results of RIA-simulation tests,
    conducted in research reactors. The criteria are commonly defined in terms
    of limits on the radially averaged specific enthalpy or the increment of this
    property during the reactivity-initiated accident.
    Experimental programs have been conducted worldwide since the early
    1960s to evaluate fuel behavior during rapid energy deposition simulating
    reactivity accidents. Prior to the late 1980s, all the relevant RIA simulation
    experiments were conducted in the United States and Japan [Electric Power
    Research Institute, 2015]. In the United States, the two main programs were
    the Special Power Excursion Reactor Test (SPERT) Capsule Driver Core
    (CDC) and the PBF RIA tests. The experiments in Japan were conducted
    by JAEA in the NSRR facility. The early RIA simulation tests in the United
    States and Japan consisted of experimental programs on unirradiated test
    rods or low burnup (<30 GWd/tU) test rods specially fabricated for testing

    418                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    and were pre-irradiated in material test reactors such as the Engineering
    Test Reactor or the Japanese Materials Test Reactor. A primary goal
    of most of these tests was to investigate the post-failure consequences
    leading to coolant pressure pulse generation. Consequently, these test rods
    were fabricated with reduced rod diameters and high 235 U enrichments to
    achieve high levels of energy deposition. In addition, the pre-irradiation
    was accelerated to obtain the desired burnup in the shortest time possible.
    These conditions introduced complexities that make application of the data
    to LWR fuel rod conditions difficult. As a result, most of these data are only
    applicable to zero burnup.
    More recently, three experimental programs have been conducted to
    evaluate the behavior of irradiated fuel rods from commercial reactors
    during RIA conditions. These programs include the CABRI REP Na tests in
    France, the NSRR tests in Japan and the IGR/BIGR tests in Russia. A total
    of 76 RIA simulation tests have been conducted on LWR-type test rods in
    the burnup range between 26–77 GWd/tU, including 36 tests on PWR-type
    fuel rods, 16 tests on BWR-type fuel rods, 7 tests on PWR MOX-type fuel
    rods, 1 test on a BWR MOX-type fuel rod, and 14 tests on VVER-type
    fuel rods.
    Figure 10.1 shows a plot of the RIA-simulation tests from CABRI,
    NSRR and IGR/BIGR [Electric Power Research Institute, 2015]. The
    maximum radially averaged peak fuel enthalpy is plotted as a function of the
    test rod burnup for 76 tests. Those tests that experienced cladding failure are
    indicated by a solid symbol and are plotted at the radial average fuel enthalpy
    at failure. The data show a general downward trend that is caused by a
    decrease in test segment reactivity with burnup. As shown in Figure 10.1,
    the rods that experienced cladding failure are interspersed amongst the rods
    where the cladding remained intact following the power pulse. Because of
    the fact that the failed and non-failed rods are interspersed when plotted
    as a function of burnup, indicates that burnup is not the sole parameter
    that influences the cladding integrity — other parameters such as cladding
    temperature, the level of zirconium oxidation, the cladding hydrogen
    content, prior fuel pellet equilibrium radial temperature distribution, and
    zirconium hydride content and distribution may also have an impact.
    Table 10.1 of burnup dependent fuel enthalpy increase values illustrates
    how the PCMI failure threshold becomes smaller as the burnup increases.

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                          419

    Fig. 10.1. Radial average peak fuel enthalpy as a function of test rod burnup for RIA
    simulation tests performed in the United States, France and Japan (Tests with cladding
    failure are indicated by solid symbols) — downward trend in the data is caused by the
    decrease in test rod reactivity with burnup accumulation [Electric Power Research Institute,
    2015].

    Table 10.1. PCMI failure threshold in Japan
    [Working Group on Fuel Safety, 2012].

    Burnup (GWd/MTU)         Enthalpy (cal/g UO2 )

    ≤25                               110
    25–40                              85
    40–65                              50
    65–75                              40

    In Japan, the threshold of PCMI failure in terms of enthalpy increase (cal/g
    UO2) has been determined in terms of burnup (GWd/MTU) based on NSRR,
    CABRI, SPERT and PBF data [Working Group on Fuel Safety, 2012].
    For example, let us discuss the acceptance criteria for the rod ejection
    event, which is classified as a postulated accident. Postulated accidents are

    420                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    of such low frequency (<10−2 /year) [Electric Power Research Institute,
    2015] that they are not expected to occur, although they are considered in
    the design basis. The pertinent acceptance criteria are:

    (1) Average fuel pellet enthalpy at the hot spot shall remain below a certain
    limit, which may be dependent on fuel burnup. This criterion ensures
    that core coolability is maintained.
    (2) Average clad temperature at the hot spot shall not exceed a certain limit
    and the oxidation of zirconium should be less than a certain fraction of
    the amount. This criterion ensures that clad melting and excessive clad
    embrittlement is avoided.
    (3) Peak reactor coolant pressure shall remain at a value lower than the
    value, which could cause stress to exceed the faulted condition stress
    limits. This criterion ensures that the structure of the reactor coolant
    boundary is not challenged.
    (4) Fuel melting is limited to less than a certain fraction of the fuel volume
    at the hot spot, even if the average fuel pellet enthalpy is below the limits
    of the first criterion above. This criterion ensures that fuel dispersal into
    the coolant will not occur.

    Revised acceptance criteria have been developed for use in the safety
    analysis of the HZP and hot-full power (HFP) RIAs in PWRs and BWRs.
    The primary RIA events considered are the postulated REAs for PWRs and
    the postulated CRDA for BWRs. The revised RIA acceptance criteria have
    been developed as part of the on-going nuclear industry effort to extend fuel
    rod average burnup levels beyond the current limit of 62 GWd/MTU.

    10.2 Description of Scenarios
    10.2.1 Overview of reactivity insertion events
    As discussed in preceding sections, the following reactivity insertion
    scenarios usually are considered:

    (a) For PWRs — CRW, REA, MSLB and BDT;
    (b) For VVERs — CRW, REA, MSLB and BDT;
    (c) For BWRs — CRW, CRDA and TT.

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       421

    Fig. 10.2. Fuel response to a rapid reactivity insertion [U.S. Nuclear Regulatory
    Commission, 2015].


    Among these scenarios the REA as a DBA in PWRs, and VVERs,
    and the CRDA as a DBA in BWRs are of particular interest, since they
    may lead to fast and significant power excursions in fuel elements close
    to the ejected or dropped control rod. As illustrated in Figure 10.2, the
    uncontrolled movement of a single control rod out of the core results in
    a positive reactivity insertion, which promptly increases local core power.
    Fuel temperatures rapidly increase prompting fuel pellet thermal expansion.
    The reactivity excursion is initially mitigated by Doppler feedback and
    delayed neutron effects followed by a reactor trip. The characteristics of
    power pulse depend on accident conditions — the reactivity worth of the
    ejected rod, the core and fuel design, the reactor-operating state and the
    time in cycle depletion. The reactivity worth of the ejected rod depends on
    its position and insertion depth in the core, the core axial power shape and
    the fuel burnup distribution close to the ejected rod.
    Because reactivity insertion events are fast, their analyses are usually
    performed using multi-physics computational models, which couple
    neutron kinetics models, fuel rod thermal-mechanics models and coolant

    422                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs


    thermal-hydraulic models. Since these events include localized reactivity
    addition to the core, three-dimensional models are preferable and when used
    in a coupled multi-physic framework, are the current state of the art codes
    for analyses of reactivity-initiated accidents and transients.

    10.2.2 Power pulse and characteristics
    The pulse width and fuel enthalpy under the REA and CRDA depend
    strongly on the reactivity of the ejected/dropped control rod and initial
    state (insertion level prior to the accident). The events initiating from HFP
    have considerable wider pulses than accidents that occur at HZP conditions.
    As a result, the maximum fuel enthalpy increase is more moderate for the
    reactivity insertion events at HFP than at HZP.
    The power pulse characteristics, which are important for nuclear
    fuel behavior, are the width, shape and amplitude of the power pulse.
    The width and shape can be treated as core-wide parameters while the
    pulse amplitude is a local property. The key parameters that define the
    power pulse characteristics are pulse width, maximum radial average fuel
    enthalpy, the total energy deposition and the initial fuel enthalpy.
    The schematic in Figure 10.3 [Electric Power Research Institute, 2015]
    highlights the relationships between the power pulse, the energy deposition
    and the radial average fuel enthalpy. The energy deposition represents the
    integration of the power-time curve and reaches the total energy deposited
    once the power excursion returns to zero. The radial average fuel enthalpy
    is calculated based on the UO2 specific heat and the radial temperature
    profile. The maximum is reached near the late part of the power pulse
    as heat conduction effects begin to dominate. The relative response of
    these phenomena depends on the pulse width defined by the full-width
    half maximum (FWHM) of the power pulse.
    Regardless of the speed of a falling BWR control blade or an ejecting
    PWR control rod, the nuclear reaction soon becomes prompt critical. From
    that point on, the rate of power increases and subsequent Doppler-caused
    decrease in reactivity depends only on nuclear properties of the core design.
    In general, the resulting pulse has a half-width (i.e., pulse width at half
    maximum) of only a few tenths of a millisecond. Because little heat is
    transferred from the fuel pellet to the cladding during this time, the event
    can be considered adiabatic. Consequently, a power pulse in a RIA is usually

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       423

    Fig. 10.3. RIA power pulse showing the relationship between power, energy deposition
    and radial average peak fuel enthalpy [Electric Power Research Institute, 2015].

    characterized by the maximum fuel enthalpy in calories per gram (cal/g)
    and by the pulse half-width in milliseconds. Figure 10.4 shows the pulse
    width for typical RIA enthalpy addition in a PWR [Meyer, 2009], indicating
    to the pulse width dependence on burnup. For a given energy, the pulse is
    somewhat broader in a BWR because the nuclear properties are less strongly
    coupled in a BWR than that of a PWR.

    10.3 Specific Phenomena to be Addressed in Modeling
    10.3.1 Initial conditions
    The initial conditions used in the analyses can be modeled as suitably
    conservative or realistic (best-estimate). The incorporated degree of
    conservatism should be discussed and justified to be useful in defining
    bounding parameter values. The initial conditions are related to the state

    424                     DBA Analysis Methods for Light-Water NPPs

    Fig. 10.4. Dependence of pulse width on energy (fuel enthalpy change) for BOC and EOC
    conditions in PWRs [Meyer, 2009].


    of the reactor core and reactor system before the beginning of the transient
    event; i.e., the reactor system’s initial conditions become the boundary
    conditions. An example of representative (not exhaustive) list of initial
    conditions used in the analyses of the event under study is given as
    follows:

    (a) Neutron power level, rod axial power distribution and core radial power
    distribution;
    (b) Moderator temperature coefficient of reactivity, moderator void coeffi-
    cient of reactivity and Doppler coefficient of reactivity;
    (c) Effective neutron lifetime and delayed neutron fraction;
    (d) Core coolant flow rate and recirculation loop flow rate (BWR), core
    coolant inlet temperature, core average coolant temperature (PWR),
    core average steam volume fraction (BWR), core coolant average exit
    temperature, steam quality and steam void fraction;
    (e) Reactor coolant system inventory, coolant level in reactor vessel
    (BWR), coolant level in pressurizer (PWR), steam flow rate, steam
    pressure, steam quality (temperature if superheated), feedwater flow
    rate and feedwater temperature;

    LWR — Reactivity Transients and Accidents                       425


    (f) Chemical and volume control system flow and boron concentration
    (if these vary during the course of the transient or accident being
    analyzed);
    (g) Control rod worth — differential, integral and total, as well as rod
    insertion level and rate of ejection or drop.

    10.3.2 Feedback effects
    Multiple physics phenomena are taking place in a nuclear reactor
    core, including neutronics (reactor physics), fuel thermal-mechanical
    phenomena, thermal-hydraulics, coolant chemistry and structural material
    behaviors as illustrated in Figure 10.5. The LWR technology dominates
    the current operating nuclear power fleet around the world and is likely
    to remain dominant for the near future. In an LWR core, the structural
    mechanics behavior is mostly affected by the coolant flow, temperature and
    the state of irradiation, and these interactions could be neglected in most
    of the scenarios related to normal operating conditions, and most of the
    operating transients and non-postulated accident scenarios. The remaining
    multi-physics coupling mechanisms and feedback effects in an LWR core
    are shown in Figure